Materials and methods Results Patients with schizophrenia did not differ significantly from comparison subjects in demographic characteristics Table 1 However they had poorer performances in all neurocognitive measures. Among patients with schizophrenia acute remitting patients were comparable to stable community patients in age male-to-female ratio years of formal education and general intellectual abilities Table 1. At the time of assessments the acute remitting patients had partially recovered and had mild to moderate clinical symptoms as evidence by their mean SD CGI score of 3.28 1.07. In contrast the community patients did not exhibit overt symptoms with a mean SD CGI score of 1.151.00. The acute patients had shorter duration of illness more previous inpatient admissions higher PANSS total scores and lower mean PSP global and domain scores Table 1. Dosage of antipsychotics did not differ between these 2 patient groups. For most neurocognitive tasks stable community patients performed better than acute remitting patients and were comparable to comparison subjects in selective attention sustained attention and trail making tasks Table 1. Patterns of association between affect recognition basic neurocognitive measures and general intellectual ability were dissimilar among comparison subjects acute remitting and stable schizophrenic patients Table 2. In healthy subjects affect recognition was associated with visual-spatial working memory only. In acute remitting patients affect recognition had extensive associations with the neurocognitive measures including general intellectual ability visual-spatial working memory and selective attention. In sharp contrast for stable community patients affect recognition was not associated with general intellectual ability and the basic neurocognitive measures. The association patterns between PSP scores and clinical neurocognitive measures were distinct for acute remitting patients and stable patients as well Table 3. In acute remitting patients PSP scores did not correlate with any neurocognitive measure and clinical symptoms except the excitement symptoms. In contrast for stable patients PSP scores were extensively associated with Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised Full Intelligence Quotient absolute values of r  0.55-0.63 affect recognition absolute values of r  0.35-0.43 working memory absolute values of r  0.48-0.51 CPT sensitivity index absolute values of r  0.29-0.32 and clinical symptom dimensions especially negative symptoms absolute values of r  0.60-0.73 Table 3. For stable community outpatients multivariate regression analyses on global social functioning revealed that negative symptoms visual-spatial working memory facial affect recognition sustained attention VIQ and education were significantly associated with PSP global social functioning scores Table 4. The model was highly significant with an adjusted R 2 of 0.66 F  9.78 P b .0001. When applied to acute remitting patients the same model was not significant and global social functioning was not accounted for by any of the neurocognitive or clinical variables
Subjects Subjects in current study were recruited from the acute inpatient ward and day-care rehabilitation center of the Department of Psychiatry National Taiwan University Hospital NTUH a university-affiliated teaching hospital providing both acute inpatient care and day rehabilitation programs for severe mental disorders Forty acute remitting inpatients with schizophrenia and 33 stable community-dwelling outpatients with schizophrenia were recruited. The diagnosis of schizophrenia was made and confirmed by 2 board-certificated psychiatrists using the semistructured Diagnostic Interview for Genetic Study-Chinese Version 3940. Subjects with the following conditions were excluded history of mental retardation pervasive developmental disorder traumatic brain injury with consciousness loss epilepsy electroconvulsive therapy and alcohol andor other psychoactive substance dependence abuse during previous 1 year. The inpatient treatment of an acute episode of schizophrenia at NTUH typically lasts for 4 to 6 weeks and the mean SD duration of admission of the acute inpatients is 33.8 10.0 days. In NTUH patients were regularly referred to rehabilitation programs after clinical condition stabilized which typically started around 1 to 2 weeks after admission. Patients would make try-out visits within 1 week before planned discharge to evaluate their adjustments in the community and plan for further rehabilitation programs. Accordingly acute remitting inpatients were evaluated within the 1 week of their planned discharges when certain degree of socialoccupational functioning had been restored. The stable outpatients with schizophrenia were recruited from the regular attendants of the day care program at NTUH. They must have attended the programs for at least 3 months and were clinically stable with a Clinical Global Impressions CGI-Severity score less than 3. To provide an estimation of the degree of impairments in neurocognitive performances 40 healthy comparison subjects were recruited through advertisements in the hospital. The comparison subjects were also screened by Diagnostic Interview for Genetic Study-Chinese version to exclude concurrent Axis I psychiatric disorders and Axis II schizophrenic spectrum personality disorders. Other exclusion criteria were the same as those for patients with schizophrenia. The study protocol had been approved by the ethical review committee of NTUH and all subjects participated after giving their written informed consents. Results Patients with schizophrenia did not differ significantly from comparison subjects in demographic characteristics Table 1. However they had poorer performances in all neurocognitive measures. Among patients with schizophrenia acute remitting patients were comparable to stable community patients in age male-to-female ratio years of formal education and general intellectual abilities Table 1. At the time of assessments the acute remitting patients had partially recovered and had mild to moderate clinical symptoms as evidence by their mean SD CGI score of 3.28 1.07. In contrast the community patients did not exhibit overt symptoms with a mean SD CGI score of 1.151.00. The acute patients had shorter duration of illness more previous inpatient admissions higher PANSS total scores and lower mean PSP global and domain scores Table 1. Dosage of antipsychotics did not differ between these 2 patient groups. For most neurocognitive tasks stable community patients performed better than acute remitting patients and were comparable to comparison subjects in selective attention sustained attention and trail making tasks Table 1. Patterns of association between affect recognition basic neurocognitive measures and general intellectual ability were dissimilar among comparison subjects acute remitting and stable schizophrenic patients Table 2. In healthy subjects affect recognition was associated with visual-spatial working memory only. In acute remitting patients affect recognition had extensive associations with the neurocognitive measures including general intellectual ability visual-spatial working memory and selective attention. In sharp contrast for stable community patients affect recognition was not associated with general intellectual ability and the basic neurocognitive measures. The association patterns between PSP scores and clinical neurocognitive measures were distinct for acute remitting patients and stable patients as well Table 3. In acute remitting patients PSP scores did not correlate with any neurocognitive measure and clinical symptoms except the excitement symptoms. In contrast for stable patients PSP scores were extensively associated with Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised Full Intelligence Quotient absolute values of r  0.55-0.63 affect recognition absolute values of r  0.35-0.43 working memory absolute values of r  0.48-0.51 CPT sensitivity index absolute values of r  0.29-0.32 and clinical symptom dimensions especially negative symptoms absolute values of r  0.60-0.73 Table 3. For stable community outpatients multivariate regression analyses on global social functioning revealed that negative symptoms visual-spatial working memory facial affect recognition sustained attention VIQ and education were significantly associated with PSP global social functioning scores Table 4. The model was highly significant with an adjusted R 2 of 0.66 F  9.78 P b .0001. When applied to acute remitting patients the same model was not significant and global social functioning was not accounted for by any of the neurocognitive or clinical variables
Assessments Results Patients with schizophrenia did not differ significantly from comparison subjects in demographic characteristics Table 1 However they had poorer performances in all neurocognitive measures. Among patients with schizophrenia acute remitting patients were comparable to stable community patients in age male-to-female ratio years of formal education and general intellectual abilities Table 1. At the time of assessments the acute remitting patients had partially recovered and had mild to moderate clinical symptoms as evidence by their mean SD CGI score of 3.28 1.07. In contrast the community patients did not exhibit overt symptoms with a mean SD CGI score of 1.151.00. The acute patients had shorter duration of illness more previous inpatient admissions higher PANSS total scores and lower mean PSP global and domain scores Table 1. Dosage of antipsychotics did not differ between these 2 patient groups. For most neurocognitive tasks stable community patients performed better than acute remitting patients and were comparable to comparison subjects in selective attention sustained attention and trail making tasks Table 1. Patterns of association between affect recognition basic neurocognitive measures and general intellectual ability were dissimilar among comparison subjects acute remitting and stable schizophrenic patients Table 2. In healthy subjects affect recognition was associated with visual-spatial working memory only. In acute remitting patients affect recognition had extensive associations with the neurocognitive measures including general intellectual ability visual-spatial working memory and selective attention. In sharp contrast for stable community patients affect recognition was not associated with general intellectual ability and the basic neurocognitive measures. The association patterns between PSP scores and clinical neurocognitive measures were distinct for acute remitting patients and stable patients as well Table 3. In acute remitting patients PSP scores did not correlate with any neurocognitive measure and clinical symptoms except the excitement symptoms. In contrast for stable patients PSP scores were extensively associated with Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised Full Intelligence Quotient absolute values of r  0.55-0.63 affect recognition absolute values of r  0.35-0.43 working memory absolute values of r  0.48-0.51 CPT sensitivity index absolute values of r  0.29-0.32 and clinical symptom dimensions especially negative symptoms absolute values of r  0.60-0.73 Table 3. For stable community outpatients multivariate regression analyses on global social functioning revealed that negative symptoms visual-spatial working memory facial affect recognition sustained attention VIQ and education were significantly associated with PSP global social functioning scores Table 4. The model was highly significant with an adjusted R 2 of 0.66 F  9.78 P b .0001. When applied to acute remitting patients the same model was not significant and global social functioning was not accounted for by any of the neurocognitive or clinical variables
Clinical symptom measures The Positive and Negative Syndrome Schedules-Chinese version PANSS-CH was used by board-certificated psychiatrists YJP and SKL well experienced in PANSS-CH to evaluate the severity of clinical symptoms Specifically factor analytic study demonstrated that the 14 positive and negative subscale items of the PANSS-CH regrouped into 4 symptom dimensions that is negative disorganization delusionhallucination and excitement which had been demonstrated to be more closely associated with underlying neurocognitive processes 41. The 14 PANSS-CH items hence were selected to represent the core schizophrenic psychopathology and mean symptom dimension scores were calculated by the summed average of the item scorings included in each dimension. Results Patients with schizophrenia did not differ significantly from comparison subjects in demographic characteristics Table 1. However they had poorer performances in all neurocognitive measures. Among patients with schizophrenia acute remitting patients were comparable to stable community patients in age male-to-female ratio years of formal education and general intellectual abilities Table 1. At the time of assessments the acute remitting patients had partially recovered and had mild to moderate clinical symptoms as evidence by their mean SD CGI score of 3.28 1.07. In contrast the community patients did not exhibit overt symptoms with a mean SD CGI score of 1.151.00. The acute patients had shorter duration of illness more previous inpatient admissions higher PANSS total scores and lower mean PSP global and domain scores Table 1. Dosage of antipsychotics did not differ between these 2 patient groups. For most neurocognitive tasks stable community patients performed better than acute remitting patients and were comparable to comparison subjects in selective attention sustained attention and trail making tasks Table 1. Patterns of association between affect recognition basic neurocognitive measures and general intellectual ability were dissimilar among comparison subjects acute remitting and stable schizophrenic patients Table 2. In healthy subjects affect recognition was associated with visual-spatial working memory only. In acute remitting patients affect recognition had extensive associations with the neurocognitive measures including general intellectual ability visual-spatial working memory and selective attention. In sharp contrast for stable community patients affect recognition was not associated with general intellectual ability and the basic neurocognitive measures. The association patterns between PSP scores and clinical neurocognitive measures were distinct for acute remitting patients and stable patients as well Table 3. In acute remitting patients PSP scores did not correlate with any neurocognitive measure and clinical symptoms except the excitement symptoms. In contrast for stable patients PSP scores were extensively associated with Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised Full Intelligence Quotient absolute values of r  0.55-0.63 affect recognition absolute values of r  0.35-0.43 working memory absolute values of r  0.48-0.51 CPT sensitivity index absolute values of r  0.29-0.32 and clinical symptom dimensions especially negative symptoms absolute values of r  0.60-0.73 Table 3. For stable community outpatients multivariate regression analyses on global social functioning revealed that negative symptoms visual-spatial working memory facial affect recognition sustained attention VIQ and education were significantly associated with PSP global social functioning scores Table 4. The model was highly significant with an adjusted R 2 of 0.66 F  9.78 P b .0001. When applied to acute remitting patients the same model was not significant and global social functioning was not accounted for by any of the neurocognitive or clinical variables
Social function assessment The Personal and Social Performance Scale PSP is developed and validated after the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders Fourth Edition Social and Occupational Functional Assessment Scale to evaluate social functioning by using objective information obtained in patients real-life settings 42 Based on patient's best possible performing levels during previous 1 month PSP is purported to provide a composite estimate for global social functioning from 4 separate social functional domains including 1 social role performances PSPSR socially useful activities including work and study 2 interpersonal relationships PSPIP personal and social relationships 3 self-care PSPSC and 4 disturbing and aggressive behaviors PSPAG. Each functional domain is rated independently along a 6-point Likert scale 0 absence 1 mild 2 manifest 3 marked 4 severe and 5 very severe according to the description for each anchoring point. Higher scores indicate poorer performances. A global social functioning score of PSP PSPGL could then be generated from the 4 individual PSP functional domain ratings following algorithm provided by PSP. The scorings of PSPGL range from 0 to 100 paralleling and reflecting those Social and Occupational Functional Assessment Scale functioning levels. A higher PSPGL score indicates better global functioning. Personal and Social Performance Scale assessments were performed by senior psychiatrists in charge of the care of the patients after standard training sessions and reliability exercises in an independent sample of 16 schizophrenic patients. The guidelines provided by PSP were used for the raters to gather all relevant observations from staffs in direct care of the patients to rate the 4 PSP functional domains. The intra-class correlation coefficients for PSPSR PSPIP PSPSC PSPAG and PSPGL were 0.96 0.96 0.92 0.82 and 0.98 respectively indicating good interrater reliability. Because social function of the acute inpatients might be underestimated due to restricted milieu exposure and active psychotic symptoms the ratings of PSP social functional domains were based on the information obtained in the very 1 week before planned discharge during which patients had partially remitted and were undertaking rehabilitation assessments and programs as well as try-outs to the community with reencountering with families and relatives. The day care patients had been regularly attending the rehabilitation programs for at least 3 months during which they were participating in a variety of occupational and social training programs and their social and occupational performances had been systemically evaluated every 1 month by the rehabilitation team. Results Patients with schizophrenia did not differ significantly from comparison subjects in demographic characteristics Table 1. However they had poorer performances in all neurocognitive measures. Among patients with schizophrenia acute remitting patients were comparable to stable community patients in age male-to-female ratio years of formal education and general intellectual abilities Table 1. At the time of assessments the acute remitting patients had partially recovered and had mild to moderate clinical symptoms as evidence by their mean SD CGI score of 3.28 1.07. In contrast the community patients did not exhibit overt symptoms with a mean SD CGI score of 1.151.00. The acute patients had shorter duration of illness more previous inpatient admissions higher PANSS total scores and lower mean PSP global and domain scores Table 1. Dosage of antipsychotics did not differ between these 2 patient groups. For most neurocognitive tasks stable community patients performed better than acute remitting patients and were comparable to comparison subjects in selective attention sustained attention and trail making tasks Table 1. Patterns of association between affect recognition basic neurocognitive measures and general intellectual ability were dissimilar among comparison subjects acute remitting and stable schizophrenic patients Table 2. In healthy subjects affect recognition was associated with visual-spatial working memory only. In acute remitting patients affect recognition had extensive associations with the neurocognitive measures including general intellectual ability visual-spatial working memory and selective attention. In sharp contrast for stable community patients affect recognition was not associated with general intellectual ability and the basic neurocognitive measures. The association patterns between PSP scores and clinical neurocognitive measures were distinct for acute remitting patients and stable patients as well Table 3. In acute remitting patients PSP scores did not correlate with any neurocognitive measure and clinical symptoms except the excitement symptoms. In contrast for stable patients PSP scores were extensively associated with Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised Full Intelligence Quotient absolute values of r  0.55-0.63 affect recognition absolute values of r  0.35-0.43 working memory absolute values of r  0.48-0.51 CPT sensitivity index absolute values of r  0.29-0.32 and clinical symptom dimensions especially negative symptoms absolute values of r  0.60-0.73 Table 3. For stable community outpatients multivariate regression analyses on global social functioning revealed that negative symptoms visual-spatial working memory facial affect recognition sustained attention VIQ and education were significantly associated with PSP global social functioning scores Table 4. The model was highly significant with an adjusted R 2 of 0.66 F  9.78 P b .0001. When applied to acute remitting patients the same model was not significant and global social functioning was not accounted for by any of the neurocognitive or clinical variables
Neuropsychologic assessments 2.2.3.1 Facial affect recognition. The computerized Taiwanese version of the facial expression subtest of The Diagnostic Analysis of Non-Verbal Accuracy II DANVA-2-TW 43 was used to assess the accuracy for recognition of the 4 basic human emotions for example happiness sadness anger and fearfulness. Although the original DANVA-2 has been applied to clinical populations including chronic schizophrenia 7 schizotypy 44 and pediatric anxiety 45 in American society the exclusive use of photos of western races and English language limits its use in Taiwan. In this regard the DANVA-2-TW has been developed as a parallel version of the original DANVA-2 and is composed of photos of Han faces and Mandarin to simulate the scenarios in Taiwanese society. The DANVA-2-TW has been demonstrated to have good reliability and applied to patients with schizophrenia their first-degree relatives and normal comparison subjects with good discriminating validity 43. The facial expression subtest of DANVA-2-TW consisted of 24 gray-scaled posed emotional photos 6 for each basic emotion which are selected from a pool of 120 photos that have been previewed by 60 healthy subjects and attain at least 80 agreement rates about which emotion category they belong to. Each photo is presented on a 15-in laptop computer screen for 500 milliseconds. Subjects are asked to make a choice of the photos emotional categories among the 4 basic emotions. The available response time was 5 seconds. The duration for stimuli display and available response time were deliberately made brief to impose a time constraint to restrict excessive cognitive reappraisal. The performance index is the percentage of correct categorization. 2.2.3.2. Selective attention. The computerized SPAN 46 is a measure of early visual processing and iconic readout. Subjects are asked to determine whether target numbers appear among an array of numbers on the computer screen and respond by pressing a button. Three sets of stimuli were used consisting of 3- 6- and 12-number arrays respectively. The stimuli lasted for 100 milliseconds and the interstimulus interval ISI was 1400 milliseconds. A total of 64 stimuli were used for each session. The performance index was the percentage of correct response. Results Patients with schizophrenia did not differ significantly from comparison subjects in demographic characteristics Table 1. However they had poorer performances in all neurocognitive measures. Among patients with schizophrenia acute remitting patients were comparable to stable community patients in age male-to-female ratio years of formal education and general intellectual abilities Table 1. At the time of assessments the acute remitting patients had partially recovered and had mild to moderate clinical symptoms as evidence by their mean SD CGI score of 3.28 1.07. In contrast the community patients did not exhibit overt symptoms with a mean SD CGI score of 1.151.00. The acute patients had shorter duration of illness more previous inpatient admissions higher PANSS total scores and lower mean PSP global and domain scores Table 1. Dosage of antipsychotics did not differ between these 2 patient groups. For most neurocognitive tasks stable community patients performed better than acute remitting patients and were comparable to comparison subjects in selective attention sustained attention and trail making tasks Table 1. Patterns of association between affect recognition basic neurocognitive measures and general intellectual ability were dissimilar among comparison subjects acute remitting and stable schizophrenic patients Table 2. In healthy subjects affect recognition was associated with visual-spatial working memory only. In acute remitting patients affect recognition had extensive associations with the neurocognitive measures including general intellectual ability visual-spatial working memory and selective attention. In sharp contrast for stable community patients affect recognition was not associated with general intellectual ability and the basic neurocognitive measures. The association patterns between PSP scores and clinical neurocognitive measures were distinct for acute remitting patients and stable patients as well Table 3. In acute remitting patients PSP scores did not correlate with any neurocognitive measure and clinical symptoms except the excitement symptoms. In contrast for stable patients PSP scores were extensively associated with Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised Full Intelligence Quotient absolute values of r  0.55-0.63 affect recognition absolute values of r  0.35-0.43 working memory absolute values of r  0.48-0.51 CPT sensitivity index absolute values of r  0.29-0.32 and clinical symptom dimensions especially negative symptoms absolute values of r  0.60-0.73 Table 3. For stable community outpatients multivariate regression analyses on global social functioning revealed that negative symptoms visual-spatial working memory facial affect recognition sustained attention VIQ and education were significantly associated with PSP global social functioning scores Table 4. The model was highly significant with an adjusted R 2 of 0.66 F  9.78 P b .0001. When applied to acute remitting patients the same model was not significant and global social functioning was not accounted for by any of the neurocognitive or clinical variables
2.2.3.3 Visual-spatial working memory. The visual-spatial N-back task is designed as a visual-spatial counterpart of the verbal N-back test for evaluating the capacity of visualspatial processing. As in the verbal N-back test successive stimuli appear on the computer screen with a fixed ISI. Instead of the digits the stimuli in the visual-spatial N-back are figures exhibiting a pattern of 4 square blocks aligned in line and one among which is shaded. Although the pattern is fixed and remains the same across all stimuli the position of the shaded block changes from stimulus to stimulus. The visual-spatial N-back task requires that subjects respond by pressing the keyboard when the position of the shaded block in the current stimulus corresponds to that in the nth stimulus back. For example in 1-back condition subjects respond only when the position of the shaded block in the current figure is the same as that in the figure immediately preceding current one. In 0-back condition subjects have to respond whenever the stimuli appear on the screen. There were 4 different N-back sessions for example the 0-back 1-back 2-back and 3-back conditions. The stimuli lasted for 100 milliseconds with available response time of 1400 milliseconds and the next stimulus would appear 300 milliseconds after subjects made the response. There are 64 stimuli for each N-back session and the performance index is the correct rate. 2.2.3.4. Sustained attention. Sustained attention was assessed with the CPT version 2.20 operated on a Sunrise Systems machine Pembroke Mass. The procedure and its test-retest reliability have been described in detail elsewhere 47. Briefly numbers from 0 to 9 were randomly presented for 50 milliseconds each at a rate of 1 per second. Subjects undertook the undergraded 1-9 CPT task in which they were asked to respond whenever a 9 preceded by 1 appeared on the screen. A total of 331 trials 34 10 of which were target stimuli were presented over 5 minutes for each session. The sensitivity index d was derived from the hit rate probability of response to target trials and false-alarm rate probability of response to nontarget trials 48 which measures an individual's ability to discriminate the target stimuli from a nontarget stimuli. 2.2.3.5. Trail making tasks. In the Trail Making Test pseudorandomly placed circles with numbers Trail Making A and with both numbers and letters Trail Making B have to be connected in a line as fast as possible in a fixed order 49. Besides the psychomotor speed hypothesized to be assessed by Trail Making A the Trail Making B additionally assesses subjects ability to shift mental sets. The difference in time seconds for completing Trail Making B and A Trail Making BA hence is used as an index for mental flexibility. Results Patients with schizophrenia did not differ significantly from comparison subjects in demographic characteristics Table 1. However they had poorer performances in all neurocognitive measures. Among patients with schizophrenia acute remitting patients were comparable to stable community patients in age male-to-female ratio years of formal education and general intellectual abilities Table 1. At the time of assessments the acute remitting patients had partially recovered and had mild to moderate clinical symptoms as evidence by their mean SD CGI score of 3.28 1.07. In contrast the community patients did not exhibit overt symptoms with a mean SD CGI score of 1.151.00. The acute patients had shorter duration of illness more previous inpatient admissions higher PANSS total scores and lower mean PSP global and domain scores Table 1. Dosage of antipsychotics did not differ between these 2 patient groups. For most neurocognitive tasks stable community patients performed better than acute remitting patients and were comparable to comparison subjects in selective attention sustained attention and trail making tasks Table 1. Patterns of association between affect recognition basic neurocognitive measures and general intellectual ability were dissimilar among comparison subjects acute remitting and stable schizophrenic patients Table 2. In healthy subjects affect recognition was associated with visual-spatial working memory only. In acute remitting patients affect recognition had extensive associations with the neurocognitive measures including general intellectual ability visual-spatial working memory and selective attention. In sharp contrast for stable community patients affect recognition was not associated with general intellectual ability and the basic neurocognitive measures. The association patterns between PSP scores and clinical neurocognitive measures were distinct for acute remitting patients and stable patients as well Table 3. In acute remitting patients PSP scores did not correlate with any neurocognitive measure and clinical symptoms except the excitement symptoms. In contrast for stable patients PSP scores were extensively associated with Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised Full Intelligence Quotient absolute values of r  0.55-0.63 affect recognition absolute values of r  0.35-0.43 working memory absolute values of r  0.48-0.51 CPT sensitivity index absolute values of r  0.29-0.32 and clinical symptom dimensions especially negative symptoms absolute values of r  0.60-0.73 Table 3. For stable community outpatients multivariate regression analyses on global social functioning revealed that negative symptoms visual-spatial working memory facial affect recognition sustained attention VIQ and education were significantly associated with PSP global social functioning scores Table 4. The model was highly significant with an adjusted R 2 of 0.66 F  9.78 P b .0001. When applied to acute remitting patients the same model was not significant and global social functioning was not accounted for by any of the neurocognitive or clinical variables
Statistical analysis Group comparisons were performed using  2 test for categorical variables and analysis of variance with post hoc Bonferroni comparisons for continuous variables Associations between affect recognition basic neurocognitve tasks and general intellectual ability were explored by correlational analyses Pearson r. Relationships between PSP scores clinical symptoms and neurocognitive measures were examined by nonparametric correlational analyses Spearman . The correlational analyses were performed on comparison subjects acute remitting patients and stable patients separately to examine whether different groups showed distinct association patterns. Multivariate regression analysis was further used to explore the relative contributions of demographic characteristic basic neurocognition affect recognition and clinical symptoms to social functions. Owing to the ordinal nature and narrow ranges of distribution of the PSP domain scores regression analysis was only performed on PSPGL scores. In preparation of the multivariate regression analysis scores of PSPGL were logtransformed to meet the normality requirements. Considering that there were many independent variables of interest and extensive correlations between demographic variables neurocognitive performances and clinical symptoms we selected the variables to be included in final regression model through the following steps. First variables were initially screened by their first-order correlations with social function scores. Second collinearity diagnoses were performed while regressing PSPGL on the preliminary set of selected independent variables including demographic characteristics age education neurocognitive measures affect recognition CPT N-Back SPAN Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised Veral Intelligence Quotient VIQ and Performance Intelligence Quotient PIQ and clinical symptoms negative symptoms and disorganization symptoms. Variables with insignificant regression coefficients and those with variance inflating factor larger than 2.0 indicating significant collinearity problems were dropped from subsequent regressions. However to retain the basic theoretical distinctions between those categories of independent variables that might have independent contributions to social function some neurocognitive variables that did not show significant association were retained for example SPAN measures were retained to control for early visual processing. The final regression analyses were then performed by regressing PSPGL on the selected independent variables. This same set of independent variables were applied to both acute remitting and stable patients with schizophrenia to test whether factors contributing to social functioning differed between these 2 patient groups. Data from comparison subjects were meant for descriptive contrasts with patients with schizophrenia they hence were not included in the regression analyses. The statistical significance was set at a P value of less than .05. All statistical analyses were done using SPSS version 10.0 SPSS Chicago IL. Results Patients with schizophrenia did not differ significantly from comparison subjects in demographic characteristics Table 1. However they had poorer performances in all neurocognitive measures. Among patients with schizophrenia acute remitting patients were comparable to stable community patients in age male-to-female ratio years of formal education and general intellectual abilities Table 1. At the time of assessments the acute remitting patients had partially recovered and had mild to moderate clinical symptoms as evidence by their mean SD CGI score of 3.28 1.07. In contrast the community patients did not exhibit overt symptoms with a mean SD CGI score of 1.151.00. The acute patients had shorter duration of illness more previous inpatient admissions higher PANSS total scores and lower mean PSP global and domain scores Table 1. Dosage of antipsychotics did not differ between these 2 patient groups. For most neurocognitive tasks stable community patients performed better than acute remitting patients and were comparable to comparison subjects in selective attention sustained attention and trail making tasks Table 1. Patterns of association between affect recognition basic neurocognitive measures and general intellectual ability were dissimilar among comparison subjects acute remitting and stable schizophrenic patients Table 2. In healthy subjects affect recognition was associated with visual-spatial working memory only. In acute remitting patients affect recognition had extensive associations with the neurocognitive measures including general intellectual ability visual-spatial working memory and selective attention. In sharp contrast for stable community patients affect recognition was not associated with general intellectual ability and the basic neurocognitive measures. The association patterns between PSP scores and clinical neurocognitive measures were distinct for acute remitting patients and stable patients as well Table 3. In acute remitting patients PSP scores did not correlate with any neurocognitive measure and clinical symptoms except the excitement symptoms. In contrast for stable patients PSP scores were extensively associated with Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale-Revised Full Intelligence Quotient absolute values of r  0.55-0.63 affect recognition absolute values of r  0.35-0.43 working memory absolute values of r  0.48-0.51 CPT sensitivity index absolute values of r  0.29-0.32 and clinical symptom dimensions especially negative symptoms absolute values of r  0.60-0.73 Table 3. For stable community outpatients multivariate regression analyses on global social functioning revealed that negative symptoms visual-spatial working memory facial affect recognition sustained attention VIQ and education were significantly associated with PSP global social functioning scores Table 4. The model was highly significant with an adjusted R 2 of 0.66 F  9.78 P b .0001. When applied to acute remitting patients the same model was not significant and global social functioning was not accounted for by any of the neurocognitive or clinical variables
