METHODS RESULTS Patients Recruitment of female fibromyalgia patients was conducted through notices in local newspapers and an academic hospital and by contacting patients in our laboratory database who had requested to be informed of research participation opportunities. The trial was advertised as a stress management writing program. Exclusion criteria were age younger than 21 years, no formal diagnosis of fibromyalgia by a physician, major psychiatric disorder, current substance abuse, previous experience with systematic journaling, lack of transportation to the research laboratory for baseline health assessments and writing sessions, or inability to read English and to write for at least 20 minutes. Patients' physicians provided confirmation of fibromyalgia diagnosis after written consent of each participant. Of 297 women who inquired, 54 (18%) were ineligible, and 129 (43%) were eligible but not interested or unavailable for scheduled laboratory visits. Thus, 114 (47%) of 243 eligible patients participated (Figure 1). Baseline Characteristics Ninety-two patients were randomly assigned: ED (N = 31), NW (N = 32), and UC (N = 29). The average patient was 50 years old, white, married or living with a partner, middle-class, with some college education, and reported onset of fibromyalgia symptoms approximately 9 years ago. Demographic characteristics by experimental condition are displayed in Table 1. The differences among the conditions were small and not statistically significant (all p > .20), except that fewer ED patients were employed (2 [2, N = 92] = 5.31; p = .07). Pretreatment data for each experimental condition are displayed in Table 2. One-way ANOVAs were computed, and the only measure on which the groups differed significantly was the MOS social functioning item (F[2,77] = 3.24; p = .05). In addition, there was a trend for group differences on the quality of sleep item (F[2,87] = 2.91; p = .06). Post hoc comparisons using Tukey's HSD method found that the ED group reported greater limitation of social functioning compared with the UC group (p = .04) and had poorer quality of sleep than the NW group (p = .05). WRITTEN EXPRESSION IN FIBROMYALGIA WRITTEN EXPRESSION IN FIBROMYALGIA Measures Attrition Eight participants who were randomized into the protocol did not reach posttreatment (ED = 2, NW = 6), one did not complete the 4-month follow-up (ED), and three more did not complete the 10-month follow-up (ED = 2, UC = 1). Thus, 12 of 92 patients (13%) did not complete the full protocol. There were no significant differences in rates of dropout by experimental condition. Because hypothesis testing focused on pretreatment to 4-month follow-up data, we compared demographic and clinical outcome variables on the 9 patients who did not reach the 4-month follow-up with the 83 patients who did complete. Only demographic variables were relevant to attrition. Dropouts had lower levels of education (2 [2, N = 92] = 6.3; p = .04), were more likely to be receiving disability (57% vs. 18%; Fisher's exact; p = .03), were older (60 vs. 49 years; t[14.1] = -4.9; p < .001), were less likely to be employed (45% vs. 78%; Fisher's exact; p = .08), and were less likely to be married (44% vs. 75%; Fisher's exact; p = .11). There were no significant differences between dropouts and completers on the clinical outcome variables measured at pretreatment. Of the 31 ED participants, 29 (94%) completed all three writing sessions, one dropped out before the first writing assignment, and another completed one session. Of the 32 NW participants, 25 (78%) completed all three writing sessions, five dropped out before the first writing assignment, one dropped out after one writing session, and one completed two writing sessions and remained the in study. Psychological Well-Being The Quality of Life Scale (QOL) is a 16-item instrument designed to measure quality of life across a broad array of life domains in patients with chronic illness. The instrument has been shown to be reliable and content valid. Among medical patients, internal consistency was above 0.85, and 6-week test-retest reliability was 0.76 (42). The state version of the State-Trait Anxiety Scale (STAI-S) is a 20-item, self-report instrument that assesses anxiety at the moment. Internal reliability is greater than 0.90 in several adult samples, it correlates well with other measures of anxiety, and it is responsive to changes in anxiety state (43). The Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI) is a 21-item self-report measure incorporating cognitive, affective, and somatic aspects of depressed mood (44). Internal consistency is 0.86 for psychiatric samples and 0.81 for nonpsychiatric samples, and the BDI has demonstrated validity in distinguishing levels of depressed mood and being sensitive to treatment change (45). Manipulation Check of Writing Conditions A manipulation check of the two writing conditions to confirm that the instructions for each condition resulted in systematic differences in the writing experience was conducted through linguistic analysis of the essays written by participants. The writing instructions explicitly directed participants in the ED condition to express emotion, whereas in the NW condition, they were instructed to focus on facts, excluding any emotionality. Using the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count program (60), we compared the numbers of positive and negative emotion words in the patients' written essays. The ED group's writing had a significantly higher percent of positive emotion words (M = 2.4%) compared with the NW group (M = 1.2%; t[55] = 6.03; p < .001). Likewise, the percent of negative emotion words varied systematically by experimental group. The ED group used a mean of 2.4% negative emotion words, compared with 0.3% in the NW group (t[37.5] = 11.56; p < .001). The content of the ED essays included death of a loved one (N = 10), family health problem (N = 7), physical or mental abuse (N = 4), personal health (N = 4), divorce (N = 3), and miscellaneous traumas (N = 3). Pain The Multidimensional Pain Inventory (MPI) is a 61-item self-report inventory for use in chronic pain populations that generates 13 empirically derived scale scores, including pain severity, perception of how pain interferes with daily life activities, appraisals of the support received from significant others, and perception of how significant others respond to their displays of pain. Internal consistency of scale items ranges from 0.70 to 0.90, and test-retest stability of the scales ranges from 0.62 to 0.91 (46). A taxonomy of three adaptational styles of coping with pain has been derived and replicated across a variety of chronic pain groups (47)(48)(49)(50)(51). The McGill Pain Questionnaire is a widely-used self-report pain questionnaire assessing
Here's the text with the weird characters removed:

"Several domains of pain experience: intensity, sensory, and affective. Test-retest reliability within 7 days is 0.70. The McGill Pain Questionnaire has been shown to differentiate among distinct pain syndromes, and a review of factor analytic investigations has found support for the affective and sensory dimensions. Reliability and validity have been documented across several studies. Combining Control Groups Comparisons of the two control groups were conducted on the three composite measures and remaining individual outcome measures using planned comparisons of pretreatment to 4-month follow-up change. No significant differences were found which allowed the groups to be combined into a single control group (NW UC) for the purpose of testing the primary hypothesis.
Fatigue The energy/fatigue 4-item subscale of the Medical Outcome Survey (MOS) Short-Form General Health Survey was used. Internal consistency for the scale is 0.78, and it has been shown to differentiate fatigue levels between patient and nonpatient groups. Three additional items assessing tiredness on awakening, tiredness during the day, and quality of sleep were rated over the past week on 4-point scales. Hypothesis Testing Change in psychological well-being was examined with a planned comparison of change from pretreatment to 4-month follow-up for the ED group versus the NW UC group. A significant difference was found (t[238]  2.63; p  .009; ES  0.47; d  0.54) as a result of a worsening for NW UC and a slight improvement for ED. Change from pretreatment to posttreatment was not different for the groups (t[238]  0.86; p  .39), and it was not different from pretreatment to the 10-month follow-up (t[238]  0.35; p  .73). Analysis of the effects for each measure making up the composite found that both QOL (t[238]  2.71; p  .007) and BDI (t[236]  2.59; p  .01) but not STAI-S contributed to the effect observed for the psychological wellbeing composite measure. Whereas 57% of the ED and 50% of the NW UC patients were classified as having moderate to severe depressive symptoms (BDI  17) at pretreatment, at the 4-month follow-up, only 32% of the ED group did, whereas the NW UC group remained at 50%. A significant treatment effect was also found for the pain composite measure. A significant treatment effect was also found for the fatigue composite measure. Change from pretreatment to posttreatment was not different for the groups, and it was not different from pretreatment to the 10-month follow-up. Examination of the 5 items/scales comprising the composite found that each followed the pattern of the composite, but only changes from pretreatment to 4-month follow-up in MOS energy.
Other Health Variables The Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire (FIQ) is an adaptation of the Health Assessment Questionnaire and the Arthritis Impact Measurement Scales. Items assessing physical functioning and stiffness were used in this study. One-week test-retest reliability for physical functioning is 0.95, and validity is comparable with the scales on which it is based and is satisfactory. Four additional subscales from the MOS Short-Form General Health Survey were selected: overall health, social functioning, health distress, and cognitive dysfunction. Three items from the Clinical Health Assessment Questionnaire (CLINHAQ) were used to assess gastrointestinal, headache, and fatigue symptoms on a 100-point visual analogue scale (VAS). RESULTS
Design Study participants were randomized into one of three conditions: emotional disclosure writing condition (ED), neutral writing condition (NW), and usual-care condition (UC). Randomization was achieved through a computer-generated random distribution of sequential numbers into three groups. This group assignment list was kept by the first author, who was not involved in patient recruitment or eligibility determination. When a patient was determined to be eligible, the first author consulted the assignment list and informed the research staff of the patient's group assignment. The NW condition controlled for any placebo effects associated with coming to the laboratory and engaging in a credible treatment activity. The UC condition controlled for the natural course of the illness and provided a basis on which to determine whether the NW condition exhibited any effect beyond UC. MPI patient classification was used to stratify patient assignment to the experimental groups such that equal numbers of patients in the three pain classifications were randomly assigned to each experimental condition to allow investigation of relative attrition and treatment response (not reported in this article). Assessments were conducted before randomization, posttreatment, at 4-month follow-up, and at 10-month follow-up. Data collection began in October 2001, and follow-up was completed in September 2003. Baseline Characteristics Ninety-two patients were randomly assigned: ED (N  31), NW (N  32), and UC (N  29). The average patient was 50 years old, white, married or living with a partner, middleclass, with some college education, and reported onset of fibromyalgia symptoms approximately 9 years ago. Demographic characteristics by experimental condition are displayed in Table 1. The differences among the conditions were small and not statistically significant (all p  .20), except that fewer ED patients were employed ( 2 [2, N  92]  5.31; p  .07). Pretreatment data for each experimental condition are displayed in Table 2. One-way ANOVAs were computed, and the only measure on which the groups differed significantly was the MOS social functioning item (F[2,77]  3.24; p  .05). In addition, there was a trend for group differences on the quality of sleep item (F[2,87]  2.91; p  .06). Post hoc comparisons using Tukey's HSD method found that the ED group reported greater limitation of social functioning compared with the UC group (p  .04) and had poorer quality of sleep than the NW group (p  .05).
Procedure Interested patients were provided with detailed information about the trial and screened for eligibility during an initial telephone interview. Participants were scheduled for pretreatment assessment in the laboratory, at which time informed consent and permission to contact their physician to confirm their diagnosis of fibromyalgia were obtained and assessment instruments were completed. On completion of their pretreatment visit, patients were informed that they would be contacted within the next couple of days regarding their group assignments and dates for their next laboratory visits. The MPI was scored, classification was determined, assignment to condition was made, and patients were telephoned and informed of assignment to a writing condition or usual care. Patients who could not be classified into one of the three MPI adaptational groups (N  22), ie, scoring indicated hybrid or anomalous patterns, were not randomized into the study design. Patients assigned to the ED or NW conditions were scheduled for three visits to the laboratory in approximately 1-week intervals. On arrival at the laboratory, patients were escorted into a private office, a research staff member read aloud the writing assignment for that session, and patients were left alone with a written copy of the instructions for 20 minutes to complete their writing. The research staff alerted the patient 20 minutes later that the session was complete and collected the writing. Posttreatment

 and follow-up assessments were conducted by mail. Patients were paid $40 for participation. The research protocol was approved by the Stony Brook University Research Compliance office. WRITTEN EXPRESSION IN FIBROMYALGIA
Written Emotional Disclosure Condition The written emotional disclosure condition (ED) instructions, a variation on those used in previous studies, focused on factual retelling of an important current or past traumatic event along with emotional expression and cognitive reappraisal. The instructions indicated that grammar and spelling were unimportant and that the writing should involve deep thoughts and feelings about the event. The instructions for session 2 encouraged patients to consider the trauma in a comprehensive, integrated way, to consider relating it to effects it may have had on their beliefs and life view, and to write in a story format with a beginning, middle, and end. Session 3 instructions suggested that patients reflect on any new insights they might have gained from the two previous writing sessions and to write about these insights, changes in how they think or feel about the event now, and things they could do differently in the future. Patients were provided with the pager telephone number of an on-call clinician who could be contacted between writing sessions in case of emotional upset caused by the writing. Attrition Eight participants who were randomized into the protocol did not reach posttreatment (ED  2, NW  6), one did not complete the 4-month follow-up (ED), and three more did not complete the 10-month follow-up (ED  2, UC  1). Thus, 12 of 92 patients (13%) did not complete the full protocol. There were no significant differences in rates of dropout by experimental condition. Because hypothesis testing focused on pretreatment to 4-month follow-up data, we compared demographic and clinical outcome variables on the 9 patients who did not reach the 4-month follow-up with the 83 patients who did complete. Only demographic variables were relevant to attrition. Dropouts had lower levels of education ( 2 [2, N  92]  6.3; p  .04), were more likely to be receiving disability (57% vs. 18%; Fisher's exact; p  .03), were older (60 vs. 49 years; t[14.1]  4.9; p  .001), were less likely to be employed (45% vs. 78%; Fisher's exact; p  .08), and were less likely to be married (44% vs. 75%; Fisher's exact; p  .11). There were no significant differences between dropouts and completers on the clinical outcome variables measured at pretreatment. Of the 31 ED participants, 29 (94%) completed all three writing sessions, one dropped out before the first writing assignment, and another completed one session. Of the 32 NW participants, 25 (78%) completed all three writing sessions, five dropped out before the first writing assignment, one dropped out after one writing session, and one completed two writing sessions and remained the in study.
Neutral Writing Condition The neutral writing condition (NW) instructions, identical to those used in previous studies, directed the patient to write without concern about spelling or grammar about day-to-day activities in relation to the time invested. Session 1 asked for a description of plans for the past week; session 2 focused on the previous 24 hours; session 3 focused on the upcoming week. It was emphasized that only facts should be written, not any emotions associated with them. Manipulation Check of Writing Conditions A manipulation check of the two writing conditions to confirm that the instructions for each condition resulted in systematic differences in the writing experience was conducted through linguistic analysis of the essays written by participants. The writing instructions explicitly directed participants in the ED condition to express emotion, whereas in the NW condition, they were instructed to focus on facts, excluding any emotionality. Using the Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count program, we compared the numbers of positive and negative emotion words in the patients' written essays. The ED group's writing had a significantly higher percent of positive emotion words (M  2.4%) compared with the NW group (M  1.2%). Likewise, the percent of negative emotion words varied systematically by experimental group. The ED group used a mean of 2.4% negative emotion words, compared with 0.3% in the NW group. The content of the ED essays included death of a loved one, family health problem, physical or mental abuse, personal health, divorce, and miscellaneous traumas.
Analytic Strategy Given the large number of measurements, Type I error was managed by creating composite measures of three constructs: pain, fatigue, and psychological well-being. Composites were constructed by standardizing construct item or scale scores, using pretreatment means and SDs across all patients. These standardized scores were transposed, if needed, such that a higher score depicted more distress and were then averaged. Thus, the pretreatment composite z-scores indicated where that patient scored in relation to all patients at pretreatment. The posttreatment and follow-up z-scores indicated where that patient scored relative to all patients at pretreatment. The Pain Composite was composed of the McGill scores: sensory, affective, VAS severity, and present pain intensity. The Fatigue Composite was composed of the items tired on awakening, tired during the day, and quality of sleep, the MOS 4-item energy scale, and the CLINHAQ fatigue item. The Psychological Well-being Composite was composed of the BDI, STAI-S, and QOL. The primary hypothesis stated that the ED condition would experience greater improvement from pretreatment to the 4-month follow-up than the NW and UC control conditions. Before testing this hypothesis, we determined that the two control conditions could be combined, because planned comparisons of these two groups with respect to the change from pretreatment to 4-month follow-up on all outcome variables were not different. We next tested the primary hypothesis by comparing the change from pretreatment to 4-month follow-up in the ED condition versus the control conditions. For those outcome variables that displayed a significant treatment effect, additional planned comparisons were conducted to determine whether the treatment effect was evident immediately at posttreatment (pre to post) and whether it was maintained at the 10-month follow-up (pre to 10-month). Multilevel modeling (SAS, Version 8.2, PROC MIXED) was used to estimate a repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) model that allowed for unbalanced (incomplete) data. Unlike traditional repeated-measures ANOVA, in which subjects who are missing any assessment are entirely excluded from the analysis, this procedure uses all available data and thereby maximizes statistical power. The model that was estimated treated the four assessments (pretreatment, posttreatment, 4-month follow-up, and 10-month follow-up) as repeated measures, group (ED versus the combined control group) as the primary factor, and employment status as a covariate, because the groups differed on percent employed. As in most clinical trials, the focus was on the group by time interaction effect. However, rather than test the less-powered full 3 df hypothesis, we decided, a priori, to test specific 1 df contrasts in a hierarchical fashion. Specifically, we first tested our primary hypothesis concerning the treatment effect at 4-month follow-up. Only when this was statistically significant did we proceed to examine whether the treatment effect was already present at posttreatment and whether
In the case of significant treatment effects, we also present estimates of the treatment effect size (ES), defined as the group difference in average change divided by the SD of pretreatment scores on the variable. We also report Cohen's d, a statistic commonly reported in meta-analyses that characterizes differential group effects relative to the SD of change scores. As described in Cohen, the statistical power of the study depends on d, but the cross-sectional SD (rather than the SD of the change scores) provides a more interpretable metric for evaluating the magnitude of treatment effect. An analysis of statistical power indicated that with N = 30 in the ED group and N = 60 in the (combined) control groups and α = 0.05 (2-tailed), the study would have 83% power to detect a difference of 0.66 SDs of change scores (d = 0.66). Given that d depends on the effect size and the correlation between premeasurement and subsequent measurements, it follows that if the correlation is 0.50/0.60/0.70, then the study will have 83% power to detect effect sizes of 0.66/0.60/0.52. Combining Control Groups Comparisons of the two control groups were conducted on the three composite measures and remaining individual outcome measures using planned comparisons of pretreatment to 4-month follow-up change. No significant differences were found which allowed the groups to be combined into a single control group (NW + UC) for the purpose of testing the primary hypothesis.