Method Method A randomised controlled trial A randomised controlled trial was conducted to compare the effects of was conducted to compare the effects of internet-based cognitive ^behavioural internet-based cognitive ^behavioural therapy with minimal therapist contact therapy with minimal therapist contact (plus participation in a discussion group) (plus participation in a discussion group) with the effects of participation in a with the effects of participation in a discussion group only. discussion group only. Results
METHOD METHOD The randomised controlled trial compared The randomised controlled trial compared internet-administered self-help, including internet-administered self-help, including minimal therapist contact, with a waiting-minimal therapist contact, with a waitinglist condition consisting of participation in list condition consisting of participation in a moderated discussion group online a moderated discussion group online (Houston (Houston et al et al, 2002). Those in the active, 2002). Those in the active treatment group were also invited to parti-treatment group were also invited to participate in a separate moderated discussion cipate in a separate moderated discussion group. The medical ethics committee in group. The medical ethics committee in Uppsala, Sweden, approved the protocol. Uppsala, Sweden, approved the protocol. Participants were recruited through a Participants were recruited through a press release and subsequent articles in press release and subsequent articles in Swedish newspapers. Information regard-Swedish newspapers. Information regarding the study was given in these articles, ing the study was given in these articles, including the address of a website that pro-including the address of a website that provided general information and instructions vided general information and instructions on how to proceed for participation in the on how to proceed for participation in the study. This included giving informed con-study. This included giving informed consent, which was done by e-mail. On this sent, which was done by e-mail. On this website participants were instructed to website participants were instructed to complete a computerised version of the complete a computerised version of the Composite International Diagnostic Inter-Composite International Diagnostic Interview Short-Form (CIDI-SF; Kessler view Short-Form (CIDI-SF; Kessler et al et al,, 1998). The Swedish version of the instru-1998). The Swedish version of the instrument was developed in a previous study ment was developed in a previous study on panic disorder (Carlbring on panic disorder (Carlbring et al et al, 2001(Carlbring et al et al, ),, 2001)), and the translation into Swedish (with back and the translation into Swedish (with back translation) has been approved by the translation) has been approved by the World Health Organization. Evaluation World Health Organization. Evaluation of CIDI-SF data yields a probability of of CIDI-SF data yields a probability of caseness ranging from 0.0 to 1.0 for the caseness ranging from 0.0 to 1.0 for the disorders of major depression, generalised disorders of major depression, generalised anxiety, specific phobia, social phobia, anxiety, specific phobia, social phobia, agoraphobia, panic attack, obsessive-agoraphobia, panic attack, obsessivecompulsive disorder, alcohol dependence compulsive disorder, alcohol dependence and drug dependence (http://www.who.int/ and drug dependence (http://www.who.int/ msa/cidi/cidisf.htm). The score is interpret-msa/cidi/cidisf.htm). The score is interpreted as the probability that the respondent ed as the probability that the respondent would meet the full diagnostic criteria would meet the full diagnostic criteria if given the complete CIDI. Participants if given the complete CIDI. Participants also completed the Montgomery-Asberg also completed the Montgomery-A ˚sberg Depression Rating Scale -Self-rated Depression Rating Scale -Self-rated (MADRS-S; Montgomery & Asberg, (MADRS-S; Montgomery & A ˚sberg, 1979;Mattila-Evenden 1979;Mattila-Evenden et al et al, 1996) on the, 1996) on the website, and a set of background questions website, and a set of background questions requesting their e-mail address; information requesting their e-mail address; information on their age, gender, the size of town in on their age, gender, the size of town in which they lived, the three first digits of which they lived, the three first digits of their postal code (to obtain an estimate of their postal code (to obtain an estimate of geographical spread within Sweden), geographical spread within Sweden), education, occupation, medication and education, occupation, medication and contacts with healthcare professionals. contacts with healthcare professionals. The following inclusion criteria was The following inclusion criteria was used, based on self-report: used, based on self-report: (a) (a) a probability of 0.55 or more for a probability of 0. Participants were randomised by an Participants were randomised by an independent person (not involved in independent person (not involved in the study or recruitment), who drew the the study or recruitment), who drew the numbers of the (consecutively numbered) numbers of the (consecutively numbered) applicants from a bowl and placed them applicants from a bowl and placed them alternately into one of two separate envel-alternately into one of two separate envelopes, which were handed to the researchers opes, which were handed to the researchers later. Once allocated to treatment or the later. Once allocated to treatment or the control condition, each participant was sent control condition, each participant was sent an e-mail with a log-in user name. On log-an e-mail with a log-in user name. On logging in for the first time, the participants ging in for the first time, the participants were required to fill out the pre-treatment were required to fill out the pre-treatment questionnaires. However, participants were questionnaires. However, participants were not informed about their group status until not informed about their group status until they had completed the questionnaires. they had completed the questionnaires. Results Internet-based therapy with Internet-based therapy with minimal therapist contact, combined with minimal therapist contact, combined with activity in a discussion group, resulted in activity in a discussion group, resulted in greater reductions of depressive greater reductions of depressive symptoms compared with activity in a symptoms compared with activity in a discussion group only (waiting-list control discussion group only (waiting-list control group). At 6 months'follow-up, group). At 6 months'follow-up, improvement was maintained to a large improvement was maintained to a large extent. extent.
Outcome measures Outcome measures The principal outcome measure of de-The principal outcome measure of depression, 1992). The QoLI includes 16 dimensions of life (e.g. health, includes 16 dimensions of life (e.g. health, economy); for each dimension a rating is economy); for each dimension a rating is made regarding importance (scored 0 to 2) made regarding importance (scored 0 to 2) and of how pleased the person is with that and of how pleased the person is with that dimension (scored dimension (scored 7 73 to +3, but with no 3 to +3, but with no 0 alternative). The QoLI has been reported 0 alternative). The QoLI has been reported to have satisfactory reliability and validity to have satisfactory reliability and validity (Frisch (Frisch et al et al, 1992). All outcome measures, 1992). All outcome measures were administered using the internet. were administered using the internet. Conclusions Conclusions Internet-delivered Internet-delivered cognitive ^behavioural therapy should be cognitive ^behavioural therapy should be pursued further as a complement or pursued further as a complement or treatment alternative for mild-to-treatment alternative for mild-tomoderate depression. moderate depression.
Treatment conditions Treatment conditions The cognitive-behavioural self-help treat-The cognitive-behavioural self-help treatment was based on Beck's cognitive ment was based on Beck's cognitive therapy, as presented in numerous sources therapy, as presented in numerous sources (e.g. Burns, 1999), and on behavioural (e.g. Burns, 1999), and on behavioural activation (Lewinsohn activation (Lewinsohn et al et al, 1986;Martell, 1986;Martell et al et al, 2001). The material (presented in, 2001). The material (presented in Swedish) consisted of 89 pages of text, Swedish) consisted of 89 pages of text, divided into five modules: introduction; divided into five modules: introduction; behavioural activation; cognitive restruc-behavioural activation; cognitive restructuring; sleep and physical health; and turing; sleep and physical health; and relapse prevention and future goals. The relapse prevention and future goals. The sleep module was based on a programme sleep module was based on a programme for insomnia (Strom for insomnia (Stro ¨m et al et al, 2004). Each, 2004). Each module ended with a quiz, with questions module ended with a quiz, with questions on the content of the module. Responses on the content of the module. Responses were automatically sent to the therapist, were automatically sent to the therapist, who in turn gave e-mail feedback on the who in turn gave e-mail feedback on the answers and gave the participant access to answers and gave the participant access to the next treatment module within 24 h. the next treatment module within 24 h. Each module was available on the website Each module was available on the website in hypertext markup language (HTML) for-in hypertext markup language (HTML) format. The website was built by JavaServer mat. The website was built by JavaServer Pages (JSP) programming and MySQL Pages (JSP) programming and MySQL databases. The participant could also print databases. The participant could also print each module by first downloading them as each module by first downloading them as rich text format or as portable document rich text format or as portable document format documents (PDFs). The amount of format documents (PDFs). The amount of time advised for completion of all five mod-time advised for completion of all five modules was 8 weeks. However, the mean time ules was 8 weeks. However, the mean time for completion was 10 weeks. The time for completion was 10 weeks. The time spent on each participant for completion spent on each participant for completion of treatment was estimated to be 2 h in of treatment was estimated to be 2 h in total, including screening, responding to e-total, including screening, responding to emails and monitoring the discussion group. mails and monitoring the discussion group. In total 506 messages were sent to the par-In total 506 messages were sent to the participants, which included a few e-mails sent ticipants, which included a few e-mails sent to the control group. to the control group. The discussion groups were separate The discussion groups were separate and differed in their content, since the and differed in their content, since the groups had different topics to discuss. For groups had different topics to discuss. For example, the treatment group could discuss example, the treatment group could discuss the contents of the self-help material, the contents of the self-help material, whereas the control group was more likely whereas the control group was more likely to bring up topics such as sick leave and to bring up topics such as sick leave and the experience of being depressed. All the experience of being depressed. All activity in the discussion groups was activity in the discussion groups was closely monitored, with the possibility of closely monitored, with the possibility of deleting inappropriate postings. However, deleting inappropriate postings. However, this never occurred. In addition, the thera-this never occurred. In addition, the therapists in the study answered some of the pists in the study answered some of the questions posed by members of the discus-questions posed by members of the discussion groups when appropriate, for example sion groups when appropriate, for example questions regarding the website. questions regarding the website. Each time a participant in either group Each time a participant in either group logged on to the website, the MADRS-S logged on to the website, the MADRS-S was automatically administered, with the was automatically administered, with the restriction that at least 7 days had to have restriction that at least 7 days had to have passed since the previous form was com-passed since the previous form was completed. This was done in order to monitor pleted. This was done in order to monitor depression levels -and in particular zest depression levels -and in particular zest for life -on a regular weekly basis. for life -on a regular weekly basis. Declaration of interest Declaration of interest None. None. Funding detailed in Acknowledgements. Funding detailed in Acknowledgements. Several studies have found that self-Several studies have found that selfhelp therapy can be effective for the help therapy can be effective for the treatment of minor-to-moderate depression treatment of minor-to-moderate depression (McKendree-Smith (McKendree-Smith et al et al, 2003), including, 2003), including computerised self-help (Marks computerised self-help (Marks et al et al,, 2003).
Follow-up Follow-up For ethical reasons the control group mem-For ethical reasons the control group members were given access to the treatment bers were given access to the treatment modules after the intervention group had modules after the intervention group had finished their treatment. Participants were finished their treatment. Participants were contacted by e-mail and asked to fill contacted by e-mail and asked to fill in the questionnaires again on the internet in the questionnaires again on the internet 6 months after the treatment had ended. 6 months after the treatment had ended. 2003). The internet offers a new way to ad- The internet offers a new way to administer self-help treatment (Christensen & minister self-help treatment (Christensen & Griffiths, 2002). Among its advantages are Griffiths, 2002). Among its advantages are prompt feedback, monitoring and presen-prompt feedback, monitoring and presentation of material on a step-by-step basis. tation of material on a step-by-step basis. We examined the efficacy of a cognitive-We examined the efficacy of a cognitivebehavioural self-help treatment for de-behavioural self-help treatment for depression, presented and handled over the pression, presented and handled over the internet. Patients were recruited through internet. Patients were recruited through advertisement. Both the treatment group advertisement. Both the treatment group and the waiting-list control group were and the waiting-list control group were encouraged to participate in two separate encouraged to participate in two separate discussion groups on the internet, which discussion groups on the internet, which were monitored by the investigators. It were monitored by the investigators. It was predicted that the patients who was predicted that the patients who received the self-help treatment would received the self-help treatment would improve and that the benefits would improve and that the benefits would be maintained at a 6-month follow-up be maintained at a 6-month follow-up assessment. assessment.
Analysis Analysis All randomised participants with follow-All randomised participants with followup data were included in the analyses up data were included in the analyses regardless of how many treatment modules regardless of how many treatment modules they had completed. This could also be they had completed. This could also be referred to as 'intention to treat', as we referred to as 'intention to treat', as we included all those who provided post-included all those who provided posttreatment data. However, for the main treatment data. However, for the main outcome measure we also calculated results outcome measure we also calculated results on a last observation carried forward basis, on a last observation carried forward basis, replacing missing values post-treatment replacing missing values post-treatment with pre-treatment values. Since this pro-with pre-treatment values. Since this procedure assumes that values remain frozen cedure assumes that values remain frozen in time, we did not report this for all in time, we did not report this for all measures. Confidence intervals, analysis of measures. Confidence intervals, analysis of variance and variance and t t-tests were used for outcome -tests were used for outcome analyses. Significance was set at 0.05 and analyses. Significance was set at 0.05 and all tests were two-tailed. Power was esti-all tests were two-tailed. Power was estimated by assuming an effect size (Cohen's mated by assuming an effect size (Cohen's d d, defined as the standardised difference, defined as the standardised difference between groups obtained by calculating between groups obtained by calculating the mean difference and dividing by their the mean difference and dividing by their pooled standard deviation) of 0.80, which pooled standard deviation) of 0.80, which would require 52 participants to obtain a would require 52 participants to obtain a power of 80% with a conventional alpha power of 80% with a conventional alpha level of 0.05. The actual power for the main level of 0.05. The actual power for the main outcome measure with 85 participants was outcome measure with 85 participants was over 95%. over 95%. RESULTS RESULTS Of the 343 persons who completed the Of the 343 persons who completed the inclusion forms, 117 (34%) were included inclusion forms, 117 (34%) were included (Fig. 1); 226 persons were excluded from (Fig. 1); 226 persons were excluded from the study. The most common reason for the study. The most common reason for exclusion was risk of suicide ( exclusion was risk of suicide (n n¼77). 77). This was measured by item 9 on the This was measured by item 9 on the MADRS-S, and/or reported previous sui-MADRS-S, and/or reported previous suicide attempts. Since the aim was to target cide attempts. Since the aim was to target people with mild-to-moderate depression, people with mild-to-moderate depression, 67 persons were excluded after reporting 67 persons were excluded after reporting severe depression (a score of more than 30 severe depression (a score of more than 30 on the MADRS-S) and 36 after reporting on the MADRS-S) and 36 after reporting minor depression (a score below 15 on the minor depression (a score below 15 on the MADRS-S). The CIDI-SF was used to MADRS-S). The CIDI-SF was used to obtain a probability of diagnosis according obtain a probability of diagnosis according to the full CIDI, and 32 persons were to the full CIDI, and 32 persons were excluded after reporting a probability excluded after reporting a probability below 0.55 (see above). To control for below 0.55 (see above). To control for effects of recent medication (e.g. initial effects of recent medication (e.g. initial side-effects), 65 persons who had started side-effects), 65 persons who had started antidepressant medication, or altered its antidepressant medication, or altered its dosage within the last month, were dosage within the last month, were excluded. Use of antipsychotic medication excluded. Use of antipsychotic medication led to the exclusion of 2 persons. People led to the exclusion of 2 persons. People meeting the DSM criteria for bipolar dis-meeting the DSM criteria for bipolar disorder (American Psychiatric Association, order (American Psychiatric Association, 1994) were excluded ( 1994) were excluded (n n¼28). Other rea-28). Other reasons for exclusion were not filling out the sons for exclusion were not filling out the pre-treatment measures ( pre-treatment measures (n n¼11), receiving 11), receiving cognitive-behavioural therapy before the cognitive-behavioural therapy before the trial start ( trial start (n n¼6), being under 18 years old 6), being under 18 years old ( (n n¼3), not being committed to working 3), not being committed to working several hours a week with the programme several hours a week with the programme ( (n n¼2) and reporting obstacles to complet-2) and reporting obstacles to completing the programme ( ing the programme (n n¼1). Several people 1). Several people were excluded on more than one criterion. were excluded on more than one criterion. The 226 excluded persons were given an The 226 excluded persons were given an explanation by e-mail and individualised explanation by e-mail and individualised recommendations on where to seek help recommendations on where to seek help where they lived. where they lived. Post-treatment measures were com-Post-treatment measures were completed by 36 participants in the treatment pleted by 36 participants in the treatment group and 49 in the control group. These group and 49 in the control group. These 85 participants were included in all statisti-85 participants were included in all statistical analyses regardless of the amount of cal analyses regardless of the amount of treatment received. In total the rate of with-treatment received. In total the rate of withdrawal from the programme was 27% (32 drawal from the programme was 27% (32 of 117). Those who withdrew did not differ of 117). Those who withdrew did not differ significantly on pre-treatment self-report significantly on pre-treatment self-report results, age, gender, educational level, place results, age, gender, educational level, place of living (e.g. size of city) or baseline BDI or of living (e.g. size of city) or baseline BDI or QoLI scores. The main reason given for QoLI scores. The main reason given for leaving the study was that the treatment leaving the study was that the treatment was perceived as too demanding. Hence, was perceived as too demanding. Hence, the rates of withdrawal differed between the rates of withdrawal differed between the treatment group (37%) and the control the treatment group (37%) and the control group (18%). Participant characteristics are group (18%). Participant characteristics are shown in Table 1. The study participants shown in Table 1. The study participants came from different regions within Sweden, came from different regions within Sweden, ranging from rural areas to cities of more ranging from rural areas to cities of more than 100 000 people. City dwellers consti-than 100 000 people. City dwellers constituted 45% of the sample, and hence the tuted 45% of the sample, and hence the majority came from smaller cities, villages majority came from smaller cities, villages and places outside the larger cities (where and places outside the larger cities (where university clinics usually are based). university clinics usually are based).
Method Method A randomised controlled trial A randomised controlled trial was conducted to compare the effects of was conducted to compare the effects of internet-based cognitive ^behavioural internet-based cognitive ^behavioural therapy with minimal therapist contact therapy with minimal therapist contact (plus participation in a discussion group) (plus participation in a discussion group) with the effects of participation in a with the effects of participation in a discussion group only. discussion group only. Outcome on self-report measures Outcome on self-report measures Table 2 shows results on the outcome Table 2 shows results on the outcome measures, including change scores with measures, including change scores with 95% confidence intervals. Analyses of 95% confidence intervals. Analyses of variance with a 2 variance with a 26 62 design (one group 2 design (one group factor and one repeated-measures factor) factor and one repeated-measures factor) resulted in significant interactions for the resulted in significant interactions for the ¼5.72; 5.72; P P¼0.019). These interactions 0.019). These interactions reflect differences in change scores reflect differences in change scores between the active treatment and the con-between the active treatment and the control condition. The corresponding effect trol condition. The corresponding effect sizes (Cohen's sizes (Cohen's d d between groups at post-between groups at posttreatment) were 0.94 for the BDI, 0.79 treatment) were 0.94 for the BDI, 0.79 for the MADRS-S and 0.47 for the BAI. for the MADRS-S and 0.47 for the BAI. There was no statistically significant inter-There was no statistically significant interaction on the QoLI (mirrored by a low action on the QoLI (mirrored by a low effect size of 0.32). In order to check for effect size of 0.32). In order to check for potential confounding by medication status potential confounding by medication status pre-treatment, medication status was pre-treatment, medication status was entered as a between-group factor in the entered as a between-group factor in the analysis. This did not affect the outcome analysis. This did not affect the outcome (e.g. no significant main effect of inter-(e.g. no significant main effect of interaction with medication status), but we action with medication status), but we acknowledge that testing for medication in-acknowledge that testing for medication interaction effects in this study is unreliable, teraction effects in this study is unreliable, given the small sample size. given the small sample size. Further analysis of the BDI data, re-Further analysis of the BDI data, replacing missing values post-treatment with placing missing values post-treatment with pre-treatment values, also resulted in a pre-treatment values, also resulted in a significant improvement, with a mean significant improvement, with a mean reduction in score of 5.2 (95% CI 3.2-reduction in score of 5.2 (95% CI 3.2-7.1) in the treatment group and 1.5 (95% 7.1) in the treatment group and 1.5 (95% CI CI 7 70.9 to 3.2) in the control group post-0.9 to 3.2) in the control group posttreatment. The same analysis of the treatment. The same analysis of the follow-up data (bringing last observation follow-up data (bringing last observation forward for missing data) showed a mean forward for missing data) showed a mean pre-treatment to follow-up reduction in pre-treatment to follow-up reduction in score of 7.2 (95% CI 4.4-10.5) in the treat-score of 7.2 (95% CI 4.4-10.5) in the treatment group and 5.2 (95% CI 2.5-7.9) in ment group and 5.2 (95% CI 2.5-7.9) in the control group. Hence, replacing missing the control group. Hence, replacing missing values with the last observation available values with the last observation available for the full sample of 117 participants did for the full sample of 117 participants did not alter the results on the main outcome not alter the results on the main outcome measure. measure.
METHOD METHOD The randomised controlled trial compared The randomised controlled trial compared internet-administered self-help, including internet-administered self-help, including minimal therapist contact, with a waiting-minimal therapist contact, with a waitinglist condition consisting of participation in list condition consisting of participation in a moderated discussion group online a moderated discussion group online (Houston (Houston et al et al, 2002). Those in the active, 2002). Those in the active treatment group were also invited to parti-treatment group were also invited to participate in a separate moderated discussion cipate in a separate moderated discussion group. The medical ethics committee in group. The medical ethics committee in Uppsala, Sweden, approved the protocol. Uppsala, Sweden, approved the protocol. Participants were recruited through a Participants were recruited through a press release and subsequent articles in press release and subsequent articles in Swedish newspapers. Information regard-Swedish newspapers. Information regarding the study was given in these articles, ing the study was given in these articles, including the address of a website that pro-including the address of a website that provided general information and instructions vided general information and instructions on how to proceed for participation in the on how to proceed for participation in the study. This included giving informed con-study. This included giving informed consent, which was done by e-mail. On this sent, which was done by e-mail. On this website participants were instructed to website participants were instructed to complete a computerised version of the complete a computerised version of the Composite International Diagnostic Inter-Composite International Diagnostic Interview Short-Form (CIDI-SF; Kessler view Short-Form (CIDI-SF; Kessler et al et al,, 1998). The Swedish version of the instru-1998). The Swedish version of the instrument was developed in a previous study ment was developed in a previous study on panic disorder (Carlbring on panic disorder (Carlbring et al et al, 2001(Carlbring et al et al, ),, 2001)), and the translation into Swedish (with back and the translation into Swedish (with back translation) has been approved by the translation) has been approved by the World Health Organization. Evaluation World Health Organization. Evaluation of CIDI-SF data yields a probability of of CIDI-SF data yields a probability of caseness ranging from 0.0 to 1.0 for the caseness ranging from 0.0 to 1.0 for the disorders of major depression, generalised disorders of major depression, generalised anxiety, specific phobia, social phobia, anxiety, specific phobia, social phobia, agoraphobia, panic attack, obsessive-agoraphobia, panic attack, obsessivecompulsive disorder, alcohol dependence compulsive disorder, alcohol dependence and drug dependence (http://www.who.int/ and drug dependence (http://www.who.int/ msa/cidi/cidisf.htm). The score is interpret-msa/cidi/cidisf.htm). The score is interpreted as the probability that the respondent ed as the probability that the respondent would meet the full diagnostic criteria would meet the full diagnostic criteria if given the complete CIDI. Participants if given the complete CIDI. Participants also completed the Montgomery-Asberg also completed the Montgomery-A ˚sberg Depression Rating Scale -Self-rated Depression Rating Scale -Self-rated (MADRS-S; Montgomery & Asberg, (MADRS-S; Montgomery & A ˚sberg, 1979;Mattila-Evenden 1979;Mattila-Evenden et al et al, 1996) on the, 1996) on the website, and a set of background questions website, and a set of background questions requesting their e-mail address; information requesting their e-mail address; information on their age, gender, the size of town in on their age, gender, the size of town in which they lived, the three first digits of which they lived, the three first digits of their postal code (to obtain an estimate of their postal code (to obtain an estimate of geographical spread within Sweden), geographical spread within Sweden), education, occupation, medication and education, occupation, medication and contacts with healthcare professionals. contacts with healthcare professionals. The following inclusion criteria was The following inclusion criteria was used, based on self-report: used, based on self-report: (a) (a) a probability of 0.55 or more for a probability of 0. Participants were randomised by an Participants were randomised by an independent person (not involved in independent person (not involved in the study or recruitment), who drew the the study or recruitment), who drew the numbers of the (consecutively numbered) numbers of the (consecutively numbered) applicants from a bowl and placed them applicants from a bowl and placed them alternately into one of two separate envel-alternately into one of two separate envelopes, which were handed to the researchers opes, which were handed to the researchers later. Once allocated to treatment or the later. Once allocated to treatment or the control condition, each participant was sent control condition, each participant was sent an e-mail with a log-in user name. On log-an e-mail with a log-in user name. On logging in for the first time, the participants ging in for the first time, the participants were required to fill out the pre-treatment were required to fill out the pre-treatment questionnaires. However, participants were questionnaires. However, participants were not informed about their group status until not informed about their group status until they had completed the questionnaires. they had completed the questionnaires. Adherence and modules Adherence and modules completed completed Participants in the intervention group nor-Participants in the intervention group normally reached at least the fourth module, mally reached at least the fourth module, with 65% completing all modules. The with 65% completing all modules. The average number of modules completed average number of modules completed was 3.7 (s.d. was 3.7 (s.d. ¼1.9). The number of modules 1.9). The number of modules completed was weakly correlated with completed was weakly correlated with post-treatment BDI scores (Spearman's post-treatment BDI scores (Spearman's r r¼7 70.33, 0.33, P P5 50.05). 0.05).
