Methods Participants consisted of 64 individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia (n = 37), schizoaffective (n = 23), or schizophreniform disorder (n = 4) recruited from Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, Pittsburgh, and several nearby community clinics, participating in a randomized controlled trial of cognitive enhancement therapy (CET 24 ). A subsample (N = 38) of these patients has previously been reported on in a preliminary report of the effects of CET on MSCEIT performance. 25 Eligibility criteria included a Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV), diagnosis of schizophrenia, schizoaffective, or schizophreniform disorder with the onset of first psychotic symptoms within the past 8 years, IQ ! 80, absence of a substance use diagnosis within 2 months prior to study enrollment, and the presence of significant social and cognitive disability as defined by the Cognitive Style and Social Cognition Eligibility Interview used in our previous studies. 26 All diagnostic evaluations were made using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV 27 by an expert diagnostician. Enrolled participants were young, with an average age of 25.78 (SD = 6.15) years, approximately 70% (n = 44) were male, and most were either European American (n = 43) or African American (n = 13). Participants had been ill an average of 3.20 years (SD = 2.31) since their first psychotic episode, approximately twothirds (n = 42) had completed some college education, and most (n = 49) were not employed. All participants were maintained on antipsychotic medication approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder by a study psychiatrist, with the majority (98%) receiving atypical antipsychotic medications. Results
Measures Mayer-Salovey-Caruso Emotional Intelligence Test. The MSCEIT 17 is a self-administered, performance-based measure of social cognition and emotional processing ability that assesses the domains of emotion perception, understanding, facilitation, and management. The instrument is performance based in that it requires participants to solve emotionally laden problems rather than relying on self-report, 28 much like tests of mathematical or verbal intelligence. The MSCEIT consists of 141 items across 8 distinct tasks that require participants to identify emotion in human faces, scenery, and artwork; match emotions to sensations; judge which emotions facilitate certain thoughts and behaviors; identify how emotions are combined to form other emotions; identify how emotions change across intensities; and identify strategies to manage one's own emotions and the emotions of others. Two tasks comprise each of the 4 ''branch'' scores in the Mayer and Salovey 18 4-factor (emotion perception, facilitation, understanding, and management) model of emotional intelligence. For example, the MSCEIT contains a task asking participants to identify specific emotions in faces and another task asking participants to identify emotions in different pictures of scenery and artwork, and these 2 tasks form the emotion perception branch of the test. Total, subscale, and individual items are scored through a web-based scoring program (available from Multi-Health Systems, Inc, Toronto, Ontario, Canada) using unadjusted consensus norms from a large normative sample, where participants receive a score based on the proportion of individuals in the normative sample that endorse their response to a particular question. 17 Total and branch scores are automatically calculated and scaled with a mean of 100 (SD = 15), with higher scores reflecting better emotional intelligence. Individual item-scaled scores are also available through this scoring program and are scored on a common percentile metric, allowing for the aggregation of individual scaled items for item-level reliability analyses. Task and scale definitions required for scoring are available through the web-based scoring program and are also outlined by Mayer et al. 17 Validation Measures. To evaluate the discriminant, convergent, and concurrent validity 29,30 of the MSCEIT and characterize its assessments within a broader context of theoretically relevant constructs, several validation measures were employed to assess various domains of cognition, psychopathology, and functional outcome. Neuropsychological and clinical assessments were employed to examine the degree to which the MSCEIT yielded social-cognitive assessments that diverged from general neurocognitive function and psychopathology. Clinical psychopathology was assessed using total, positive, and negative symptom subscale scores from the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale, 31 which demonstrated adequate internal consistency (range of a = .74 to .83). Neurocognitive function was assessed using a comprehensive neuropsychological battery reflecting the relevant cognitive domains in schizophrenia identified by the MATRICS committee. 15 This battery included assessments of processing speed (simple and choice reaction time 32, and visual-spatial scanning 33 ), working memory (digit span component of the revised Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale 34 ), verbal memory (immediate and delayed recall components from stories A and B of the third version of the Wechsler Memory Scale, 35 and short-and long-term free recall from the California Verbal Learning Test 36 ), and executive functioning (number of perseverative errors from the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test 37 ). These measures were scaled to common z metric, recoded so that higher scores reflected better neurocognitive ability, and averaged to compute a neurocognitive composite index. This neurocognitive composite displayed adequate levels of internal consistency (a = .76). A behavioral measure of social cognition, the Social Cognition Profile, 26 was employed to examine the degree to which the MSCEIT converged with other socialcognitive assessments. The Social Cognition Profile is a 50-item, clinician-rated measure of social-cognitive behaviors gleaned from the literature on social cognition. 12,[38][39][40] Because this instrument was grounded not only in schizophrenia research on social cognition but also in the broader social-cognitive developmental literature, it covers a broad range of constructs not commonly assessed in schizophrenia research. These constructs are divided into 4 domains, supported by previous factor-analytic studies, 26 that cover tolerant (eg, accepting, respectful, cooperative), perceptive (eg, foresightful, self-aware, gistful), supportive (eg, empathic, reciprocal, friendly), and self-confident (eg, comfortable, assertive, involved) behaviors indicative of adequate social cognition. Each of the behaviors assessed are thought to be key reflections of a number of developmental socialcognitive processes, including social context appraisal, perspective-taking, interpersonal reciprocity, prospection, self-reflection on social behavior, and sensitivity to the feelings and intentions of others. Items are rated on a 5-point scale, with higher scores reflecting better social cognition. Previous research has documented that the Social Cognition Profile has adequate internal consistency and interrater reliability, converges with other behavioral measures of social cognition, and is sensitive to treatment-induced changes in social cognition. 26 In this research, we found the internal consistency of the Social Cognition Profile to be adequate (range of a = .79-.92). Finally, 3 measures of functional outcome were used to examine the degree to which the social-cognitive assessments provided by the MSCEIT held any predictive utility to theoretically relevant functional outcomes. These measures included the Social Adjustment Scale-II, 41 the Global Assessment Scale, 42 and the Performance Potential Inventory. 26 The Social Adjustment Scale-II and Global Assessment Scale are well-established measures of functional outcome commonly employed in schizophrenia research, with high scores reflecting worse and better functioning, respectively. The total and most subscale scores of the Social Adjustment Scale-II displayed adequate levels of internal consistency (range of a = .71-.84); however, the internal consistency of the 3-item self-care subscale was low (a = .55). The Performance Potential Inventory is a 55-item, clinician-rated measure of functional disability based on work disability criteria outlined by the Social Security Administration. 43 Items are rated on a 5-point scale, with higher scores indicating better functioning. The instrument yields 5 subscales assessing the domains of task/work performance, social functioning, activities of daily living, work readiness, and mental status. The mental status subscale was excluded in this research in favor of the aforementioned, performance-based neuropsychological tests. Previous research has documented the reliability and convergent validity of this measure of functional outcome. 26 In this research, we found the Performance Potential Inventory to display adequate levels of internal consistency (range of a = .86-.95). Procedures. Upon recruitment, participants were assessed for eligibility in diagnostic interviews and consensus conferences. Eligible participants were then randomized to a clinical trial of CET, which has been described elsewhere, 25 and then assessed using the MSCEIT and aforementioned measures of cognitive, clinical, and functional outcomes after randomization and prior to treatment. Neurocognitive assessments were completed by trained neuropsychologists. The Social Cognition Profile, as well as clinical and functional assessments, were completed by masters-level clinicians who had been extensively trained in their use as part of previous studies 26,44 and were intimately involved in the treatment of the participants. This study was approved by the University of Pittsburgh Institutional Review Board, and all patients provided written, informed consent prior to participation. All data-analytic procedures were conducted using R version 2.5.0 on a Linux (2.6) 64bit operating system. Descriptive Statistics and Distributional Properties Prior to examining the psychometric properties of the MSCEIT, the distributional properties and score ranges of the instrument were first checked. A large range of scores was observed for MSCEIT total (range = 54.09-121.70) and branch scores (range = 50.53-131.82), indicating adequate ranges and sufficient variability of emotional intelligence among the sample. Distributions for MSCEIT total and branch scores displayed little to no skewness (range of skewness = À0.30 to 0.15), and visual inspection of histograms and qq-plots, confirmed by Shapiro-Wilk 45 tests, indicated that none of the scales departed significantly from normality (all W > 0.97, all P > .30). Means and SDs for MSCEIT performance in this sample are displayed in table 1. Based on a series of 1-sample t-tests comparing sample scores with the mean (SD) test performance value of 100 (15) from a large normative sample, 17 participants displayed highly significant performance deficits on MSCEIT total and all branch subscores.
Methods Participants consisted of 64 individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia (n = 37), schizoaffective (n = 23), or schizophreniform disorder (n = 4) recruited from Western Psychiatric Institute and Clinic, Pittsburgh, and several nearby community clinics, participating in a randomized controlled trial of cognitive enhancement therapy (CET 24 ). A subsample (N = 38) of these patients has previously been reported on in a preliminary report of the effects of CET on MSCEIT performance. 25 Eligibility criteria included a Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders, Fourth Edition (DSM-IV), diagnosis of schizophrenia, schizoaffective, or schizophreniform disorder with the onset of first psychotic symptoms within the past 8 years, IQ ! 80, absence of a substance use diagnosis within 2 months prior to study enrollment, and the presence of significant social and cognitive disability as defined by the Cognitive Style and Social Cognition Eligibility Interview used in our previous studies. 26 All diagnostic evaluations were made using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV 27 by an expert diagnostician. Enrolled participants were young, with an average age of 25.78 (SD = 6.15) years, approximately 70% (n = 44) were male, and most were either European American (n = 43) or African American (n = 13). Participants had been ill an average of 3.20 years (SD = 2.31) since their first psychotic episode, approximately twothirds (n = 42) had completed some college education, and most (n = 49) were not employed. All participants were maintained on antipsychotic medication approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorder by a study psychiatrist, with the majority (98%) receiving atypical antipsychotic medications. Reliability We examined the reliability of the MSCEIT by computing Cronbach's a coefficient of internal consistency for each of its task and branch components. Missing data in this and all subsequent analyses were assumed to be missing at random and handled using the expectationmaximization maximum likelihood approach. 46 As can be seen in table 1, the total test displayed excellent internal consistency. Similarly, all the MSCEIT branches also displayed adequate levels of internal consistency, with the emotion perception branch displaying the highest level of internal consistency and the emotion understanding branch displaying the lowest but still acceptable level of internal consistency. Reliability estimates were somewhat lower for individual tasks, with the blends and emotion management tasks displaying suboptimal levels of internal consistency. These estimates of reliability for MSCEIT total, branch, and task scores among schizophrenia patients are quite similar to those found in a large composite scores in partial correlation analyses. As shown in table 3, of the 7 measures of functional outcome provided by the Social Adjustment Scale-II, MSCEIT performance was related to 2: major role functioning and interpersonal anguish. Only overall emotional intelligence demonstrated a statistically significant relationship with better role functioning, however trends were also observed between role functioning and emotion understanding. In addition, nonsignificant trends were observed pointing to a relationship between better emotion facilitation abilities, less interpersonal anguish, and better role functioning. When adjusting for demographic, clinical, and neurocognitive characteristics, these relationship sizes were all substantially reduced, with the exception of the relationship between emotion facilitation and interpersonal anguish. A series of stepwise analyses indicated that adjusting for psychopathology alone was enough to reduce relationship sizes between MSCEIT performance and Social Adjustment Scale-II scores to nonsignificant levels. With regard to the Performance Potential Inventory, relations with functional outcome were more prevalent, although still somewhat limited (see table 3). Social functioning was significantly related to overall emotional intelligence and emotion perception ability, and trends were observed between better social functioning and emotion understanding and management abilities. In addition, global work potential was also related to overall emotional intelligence and emotion facilitation and management abilities. However, relations with work potential were substantially reduced when adjusting for demographic, clinical, and neurocognitive characteristics. Relations between MSCEIT performance and social functioning were also somewhat reduced when adjusting for demographic, clinical, and neurocognitive characteristics, although emotion perception ability continued to display a nearly significant trend (P = .071) toward predicting social functioning. Subsequent stepwise analyses indicated that adjusting for neurocognitive functioning and psychopathology alone were enough to reduce associations between MSCEIT scores and global work potential and social functioning to nonsignificant levels. In addition, illness chronicity also contributed to a reduction in MSCEIT associations with global work potential. No significant relations were found between MSCEIT performance and Global Assessment Scale scores. Further, although type I error corrections were not employed in our primary analyses due to the exploratory nature of this initial investigation of the MSCEIT, it should be noted that none of the relations with functional outcome remained statistically significant after making adjustments for multiple inference testing.
Measures Mayer-Salovey-Caruso Emotional Intelligence Test. The MSCEIT 17 is a self-administered, performance-based measure of social cognition and emotional processing ability that assesses the domains of emotion perception, understanding, facilitation, and management. The instrument is performance based in that it requires participants to solve emotionally laden problems rather than relying on self-report, 28 much like tests of mathematical or verbal intelligence. The MSCEIT consists of 141 items across 8 distinct tasks that require participants to identify emotion in human faces, scenery, and artwork; match emotions to sensations; judge which emotions facilitate certain thoughts and behaviors; identify how emotions are combined to form other emotions; identify how emotions change across intensities; and identify strategies to manage one's own emotions and the emotions of others. Two tasks comprise each of the 4 ''branch'' scores in the Mayer and Salovey 18 4-factor (emotion perception, facilitation, understanding, and management) model of emotional intelligence. For example, the MSCEIT contains a task asking participants to identify specific emotions in faces and another task asking participants to identify emotions in different pictures of scenery and artwork, and these 2 tasks form the emotion perception branch of the test. Total, subscale, and individual items are scored through a web-based scoring program (available from Multi-Health Systems, Inc, Toronto, Ontario, Canada) using unadjusted consensus norms from a large normative sample, where participants receive a score based on the proportion of individuals in the normative sample that endorse their response to a particular question. 17 Total and branch scores are automatically calculated and scaled with a mean of 100 (SD = 15), with higher scores reflecting better emotional intelligence. Individual item-scaled scores are also available through this scoring program and are scored on a common percentile metric, allowing for the aggregation of individual scaled items for item-level reliability analyses. Task and scale definitions required for scoring are available through the web-based scoring program and are also outlined by Mayer et al. 17 Validation Measures. To evaluate the discriminant, convergent, and concurrent validity 29,30 of the MSCEIT and characterize its assessments within a broader context of theoretically relevant constructs, several validation measures were employed to assess various domains of cognition, psychopathology, and functional outcome. Neuropsychological and clinical assessments were employed to examine the degree to which the MSCEIT yielded social-cognitive assessments that diverged from general neurocognitive function and psychopathology. Clinical psychopathology was assessed using total, positive, and negative symptom subscale scores from the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale, 31 which demonstrated adequate internal consistency (range of a = .74 to .83). Neurocognitive function was assessed using a comprehensive neuropsychological battery reflecting the relevant cognitive domains in schizophrenia identified by the MATRICS committee. 15 This battery included assessments of processing speed (simple and choice reaction time 32, and visual-spatial scanning 33 ), working memory (digit span component of the revised Wechsler Adult Intelligence Scale 34 ), verbal memory (immediate and delayed recall components from stories A and B of the third version of the Wechsler Memory Scale, 35 and short-and long-term free recall from the California Verbal Learning Test 36 ), and executive functioning (number of perseverative errors from the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test 37 ). These measures were scaled to common z metric, recoded so that higher scores reflected better neurocognitive ability, and averaged to compute a neurocognitive composite index. This neurocognitive composite displayed adequate levels of internal consistency (a = .76). A behavioral measure of social cognition, the Social Cognition Profile, 26 was employed to examine the degree to which the MSCEIT converged with other socialcognitive assessments. The Social Cognition Profile is a 50-item, clinician-rated measure of social-cognitive behaviors gleaned from the literature on social cognition. 12,[38][39][40] Because this instrument was grounded not only in schizophrenia research on social cognition but also in the broader social-cognitive developmental literature, it covers a broad range of constructs not commonly assessed in schizophrenia research. These constructs are divided into 4 domains, supported by previous factor-analytic studies, 26 that cover tolerant (eg, accepting, respectful, cooperative), perceptive (eg, foresightful, self-aware, gistful), supportive (eg, empathic, reciprocal, friendly), and self-confident (eg, comfortable, assertive, involved) behaviors indicative of adequate social cognition. Each of the behaviors assessed are thought to be key reflections of a number of developmental socialcognitive processes, including social context appraisal, perspective-taking, interpersonal reciprocity, prospection, self-reflection on social behavior, and sensitivity to the feelings and intentions of others. Items are rated on a 5-point scale, with higher scores reflecting better social cognition. Previous research has documented that the Social Cognition Profile has adequate internal consistency and interrater reliability, converges with other behavioral measures of social cognition, and is sensitive to treatment-induced changes in social cognition. 26 In this research, we found the internal consistency of the Social Cognition Profile to be adequate (range of a = .79-.92). Finally, 3 measures of functional outcome were used to examine the degree to which the social-cognitive assessments provided by the MSCEIT held any predictive utility to theoretically relevant functional outcomes. These measures included the Social Adjustment Scale-II, 41 the Global Assessment Scale, 42 and the Performance Potential Inventory. 26 The Social Adjustment Scale-II and Global Assessment Scale are well-established measures of functional outcome commonly employed in schizophrenia research, with high scores reflecting worse and better functioning, respectively. The total and most subscale scores of the Social Adjustment Scale-II displayed adequate levels of internal consistency (range of a = .71-.84); however, the internal consistency of the 3-item self-care subscale was low (a = .55). The Performance Potential Inventory is a 55-item, clinician-rated measure of functional disability based on work disability criteria outlined by the Social Security Administration. 43 Items are rated on a 5-point scale, with higher scores indicating better functioning. The instrument yields 5 subscales assessing the domains of task/work performance, social functioning, activities of daily living, work readiness, and mental status. The mental status subscale was excluded in this research in favor of the aforementioned, performance-based neuropsychological tests. Previous research has documented the reliability and convergent validity of this measure of functional outcome. 26 In this research, we found the Performance Potential Inventory to display adequate levels of internal consistency (range of a = .86-.95). Procedures. Upon recruitment, participants were assessed for eligibility in diagnostic interviews and consensus conferences. Eligible participants were then randomized to a clinical trial of CET, which has been described elsewhere, 25 and then assessed using the MSCEIT and aforementioned measures of cognitive, clinical, and functional outcomes after randomization and prior to treatment. Neurocognitive assessments were completed by trained neuropsychologists. The Social Cognition Profile, as well as clinical and functional assessments, were completed by masters-level clinicians who had been extensively trained in their use as part of previous studies 26,44 and were intimately involved in the treatment of the participants. This study was approved by the University of Pittsburgh Institutional Review Board, and all patients provided written, informed consent prior to participation. All data-analytic procedures were conducted using R version 2.5.0 on a Linux (2.6) 64bit operating system. Factor Structure Having found some evidence for the reliability and discriminant and concurrent validity of the MSCEIT, we proceeded to conduct an exploratory investigation of the instrument's factor structure to examine whether a factor solution would emerge similar to those found among healthy samples when employed with individuals with schizophrenia. This was accomplished by conducting a series of exploratory principal axis factor analyses, with oblique factor rotation, on the 8 MSCEIT tasks. Visual inspection of screenplots of component eigenvalues (not shown) indicated that only 2 eigenvalues were greater than 1; as such only 1-and 2-factor solutions were considered. As can be seen in table 4, both 1-and 2-factor solutions explained a substantial proportion of the variance among MSCEIT tasks (45% and 47%, respectively), although the 2-factor solution did provide a statistically significant improvement in model fit over a 1-factor solution, Dv 2 (7, N = 64) = 19.60, P = .007. Nonetheless, both factors from this solution were highly correlated (r = 0.61). While the resulting 1-factor solution mirrors the general emotional intelligence model of Mayer and Salovey, 18 the 2-factor solution broadly represents an emotional perception and understanding factor, and an emotional facilitation and management factor, which is not consistent with either the prominent 4-factor model or the broader experiential (emotion perception and facilitation) and strategic (emotion understanding and management) area model proposed by Mayer et al. 17 Consequently, it would appear that the factor structure of emotional intelligence may be different when assessed in schizophrenia.
