Methods Results Patients were enrolled from July 16, 2012, to Oct 22, 2013. We screened 241 patients and randomised 90 to either the Deprexis or the control group (fi gure 1). The number of patients who did not complete the 9-week trial period was similar between the two groups (Deprexis n=10 [22%]; control n=9 [20%]). Baseline characteristics were much the same between the two groups (table 1). Analysis of the primary endpoint BDI showed a statistically signifi cant treatment eff ect of Deprexis (fi gure 2 and table 2). Group diff erences were slightly larger in the mixed models, multiple imputations, and the per-protocol analyses (appendix A). BDI subscale analyses showed signifi cant treatment eff ects on the subdomains of negative attitude towards self and somatic symptoms (table 2). We also analysed the BDI as a categorical variable (BDI 0-13 vs BDI >13) in the per-protocol sample post-hoc analysis). Between baseline and week 9, the number of patients above the cutoff for clinical depression decreased in the Deprexis group and increased in the control group (p for between-group treatment diff erence=0•01; fi gure 3). Based on the BDI categorical analysis, the number needed to treat was eight. 34 participants (Deprexis n=17; control n=17) from the online cohort volunteered to undergo additional psychodiagnostic assessment. In this subsample, we confi rmed a positive treatment eff ect of Deprexis on the BDI (LOCF p=0•047; d=0•75; appendix A). Similarly, depressive symptoms along DSM-IV diagnostic criteria as measured by the IDS showed a signifi cant treatment eff ect (LOCF p=0•02; d=0•95; appendix A). Furthermore, we detected treatment eff ects in the IDS cognitive subscale (LOCF p=0•02, d=0•88) but not in the somatic subscale (appendix A). The proportion of patients meeting diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder (as determined by the MINI, per protocol) decreased from baseline to 9 weeks but the diff erence between Deprexis and control was not statistically signifi cant (p=0•079; appendix A). On the basis of the MINI analysis, the number needed to treat was three. When assessing quality of life, as measured by the WHO-QoL BREF, we saw a treatment diff erence only in the psychological wellbeing subscale (table 2). When assessing the Fatigue Scale For Motor and Cognitive Function (FSMC), we saw improvement with intervention versus control in only the motor fatigue subscale (table 2) but not on cognitive fatigue symptoms (table 2). We saw no diff erence in any of the diseasespecifi c quality-of-life (HAQUAMS) subscales (table 2). On average, patients allocated to the Deprexis group spent 332 min (about 5•5 h) working with the programme (median 310 min; range 50-905). Patient satisfaction with the programme was high and most participants reported that the intervention met or exceeded their expectations (appendix A). Additionally, many of the participants indicated that they would recom mend Deprexis to others with mild-to-moderate depression and specifi cally those with multiple sclerosis. Only a few participants indicated that they needed assistance in handling the programme (n=6, 17%). However, about three-quarters (n=27, 77%) of the participants stated that they had to force themselves to complete all the sessions, and more than half (n=18, 51%) suggested that the programme might require some adjustments to suit the needs of patients with multiple sclerosis. None of the enrolled participants met the predefi ned criterion for acute risk of suicide (response 3a or 3b on SBQ-R item 3 plus score of 5 or 6 on SBQ-R item 4) at baseline or the 9-week assessment. For the low-threshold defi nition using BDI item 9, the criterion was not met by any patient in the Deprexis group (baseline n=0; 9 weeks n=0) but was met in one instance in the control group (n=1; n=1). For SBQ-R item 4, two patients met the lowthreshold criterion at baseline and no patients met it at week 9 in the Deprexis group. In the control group, four patients met this criterion at both baseline and 9 weeks. However, using the low-threshold criteria, we saw no evidence of new occurrences of suicidal ideation during the trial in either group. We saw worsening of depressive symptoms during the trial from below to above the cutoff for caseness (BDI >13) in three patients in the control group but none in the Deprexis group. All 35 patients assigned to Deprexis and included in the 9-week analysis also completed the 6-months' follow-up examination. At 6 months, BDI scores in these participants were lower than at baseline (mean BDI at baseline 19•37 [SD 9•59]; mean BDI at 6 months 14•80 [10•03]; p=0•001).
Study design and population In this randomised controlled trial, we contacted by mail patients registered in the database of the multiple sclerosis outpatient clinic at the University Medical Centre Hamburg-Eppendorf, Germany, whose scores from their last clinical visit indicated depressive symptoms (as measured by the mood subscale of the Hamburg Quality of Life Questionnaire for Multiple Sclerosis (HAQUAMS). 20 Additionally, we recruited participants via online forums following guidelines of the Hamburg Department of Data Security. Participation was free of charge. Patients were eligible for inclusion if they were aged 18-65 years, had a diagnosis of multiple sclerosis, selfreported depressive symptoms, and willingness to selfadministrate iCBT sessions for 9 weeks. Participants were excluded if they did not consent to participation, were diagnosed with bipolar or schizophrenia spectrum disorders, had substantial neurocognitive impairment such as dementia, or had suicidal ideations. We used a secure online-survey programme EFS survey) to screen for inclusion and exclusion criteria before randomisation. A subgroup of the total sample volunteered to complete in-person visits to our multiple sclerosis outpatient centre before and after the intervention. The aim of this subgroup analysis was to validate depressive symptomatology by means of additional questionnaires and structured interviews. Written informed consent was provided via the online platform. The study was approved by the ethics committee of the German Society of Psychology. Results Patients were enrolled from July 16, 2012, to Oct 22, 2013. We screened 241 patients and randomised 90 to either the Deprexis or the control group (fi gure 1). The number of patients who did not complete the 9-week trial period was similar between the two groups (Deprexis n=10 [22%]; control n=9 [20%]). Baseline characteristics were much the same between the two groups (table 1). Analysis of the primary endpoint BDI showed a statistically signifi cant treatment eff ect of Deprexis (fi gure 2 and table 2). Group diff erences were slightly larger in the mixed models, multiple imputations, and the per-protocol analyses (appendix A). BDI subscale analyses showed signifi cant treatment eff ects on the subdomains of negative attitude towards self and somatic symptoms (table 2). We also analysed the BDI as a categorical variable (BDI 0-13 vs BDI >13) in the per-protocol sample post-hoc analysis). Between baseline and week 9, the number of patients above the cutoff for clinical depression decreased in the Deprexis group and increased in the control group (p for between-group treatment diff erence=0•01; fi gure 3). Based on the BDI categorical analysis, the number needed to treat was eight. 34 participants (Deprexis n=17; control n=17) from the online cohort volunteered to undergo additional psychodiagnostic assessment. In this subsample, we confi rmed a positive treatment eff ect of Deprexis on the BDI (LOCF p=0•047; d=0•75; appendix A). Similarly, depressive symptoms along DSM-IV diagnostic criteria as measured by the IDS showed a signifi cant treatment eff ect (LOCF p=0•02; d=0•95; appendix A). Furthermore, we detected treatment eff ects in the IDS cognitive subscale (LOCF p=0•02, d=0•88) but not in the somatic subscale (appendix A). The proportion of patients meeting diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder (as determined by the MINI, per protocol) decreased from baseline to 9 weeks but the diff erence between Deprexis and control was not statistically signifi cant (p=0•079; appendix A). On the basis of the MINI analysis, the number needed to treat was three. When assessing quality of life, as measured by the WHO-QoL BREF, we saw a treatment diff erence only in the psychological wellbeing subscale (table 2). When assessing the Fatigue Scale For Motor and Cognitive Function (FSMC), we saw improvement with intervention versus control in only the motor fatigue subscale (table 2) but not on cognitive fatigue symptoms (table 2). We saw no diff erence in any of the diseasespecifi c quality-of-life (HAQUAMS) subscales (table 2). On average, patients allocated to the Deprexis group spent 332 min (about 5•5 h) working with the programme (median 310 min; range 50-905). Patient satisfaction with the programme was high and most participants reported that the intervention met or exceeded their expectations (appendix A). Additionally, many of the participants indicated that they would recom mend Deprexis to others with mild-to-moderate depression and specifi cally those with multiple sclerosis. Only a few participants indicated that they needed assistance in handling the programme (n=6, 17%). However, about three-quarters (n=27, 77%) of the participants stated that they had to force themselves to complete all the sessions, and more than half (n=18, 51%) suggested that the programme might require some adjustments to suit the needs of patients with multiple sclerosis. None of the enrolled participants met the predefi ned criterion for acute risk of suicide (response 3a or 3b on SBQ-R item 3 plus score of 5 or 6 on SBQ-R item 4) at baseline or the 9-week assessment. For the low-threshold defi nition using BDI item 9, the criterion was not met by any patient in the Deprexis group (baseline n=0; 9 weeks n=0) but was met in one instance in the control group (n=1; n=1). For SBQ-R item 4, two patients met the lowthreshold criterion at baseline and no patients met it at week 9 in the Deprexis group. In the control group, four patients met this criterion at both baseline and 9 weeks. However, using the low-threshold criteria, we saw no evidence of new occurrences of suicidal ideation during the trial in either group. We saw worsening of depressive symptoms during the trial from below to above the cutoff for caseness (BDI >13) in three patients in the control group but none in the Deprexis group. All 35 patients assigned to Deprexis and included in the 9-week analysis also completed the 6-months' follow-up examination. At 6 months, BDI scores in these participants were lower than at baseline (mean BDI at baseline 19•37 [SD 9•59]; mean BDI at 6 months 14•80 [10•03]; p=0•001).
Randomisation and masking We allocated eligible patients to either intervention group or a waitlist control group (WLC; 1:1) using a computergenerated randomisation sequence with no stratifi cation or blocking. JS was in charge of generating the random sequence. None of the other investigators had access to the random sequence at any time. Patients were allocated strictly according to the order (date and exact time of day) in which they had completed the online check of eligibility and baseline assessments of questionnaires as logged by the unipark system, ensuring that the eligibility check was blind to treatment allocation (concealed allocation). JS later was responsible for sending standardised email reminders to complete the online survey to every participant at pre-defi ned times for follow-up assessment and contributed to writing the report. Masking of the participants regarding treatment allocation was not possible due to the nature of the information (ie, behavioural intervention). All outcome measures were collected via an automated online interface, so that masking of the assessors was not necessary. For the subgroup in which outcome measures were collected in person, we made substantial eff ort to ensure that all patients were assessed by a clinician masked to group assignment-ie, the appointments were scheduled and patients were debriefed by staff members not involved in their assessment, and participants were instructed not to reveal their group assignment to the examiners at the clinic. Results Patients were enrolled from July 16, 2012, to Oct 22, 2013. We screened 241 patients and randomised 90 to either the Deprexis or the control group (fi gure 1). The number of patients who did not complete the 9-week trial period was similar between the two groups (Deprexis n=10 [22%]; control n=9 [20%]). Baseline characteristics were much the same between the two groups (table 1). Analysis of the primary endpoint BDI showed a statistically signifi cant treatment eff ect of Deprexis (fi gure 2 and table 2). Group diff erences were slightly larger in the mixed models, multiple imputations, and the per-protocol analyses (appendix A). BDI subscale analyses showed signifi cant treatment eff ects on the subdomains of negative attitude towards self and somatic symptoms (table 2). We also analysed the BDI as a categorical variable (BDI 0-13 vs BDI >13) in the per-protocol sample post-hoc analysis). Between baseline and week 9, the number of patients above the cutoff for clinical depression decreased in the Deprexis group and increased in the control group (p for between-group treatment diff erence=0•01; fi gure 3). Based on the BDI categorical analysis, the number needed to treat was eight. 34 participants (Deprexis n=17; control n=17) from the online cohort volunteered to undergo additional psychodiagnostic assessment. In this subsample, we confi rmed a positive treatment eff ect of Deprexis on the BDI (LOCF p=0•047; d=0•75; appendix A). Similarly, depressive symptoms along DSM-IV diagnostic criteria as measured by the IDS showed a signifi cant treatment eff ect (LOCF p=0•02; d=0•95; appendix A). Furthermore, we detected treatment eff ects in the IDS cognitive subscale (LOCF p=0•02, d=0•88) but not in the somatic subscale (appendix A). The proportion of patients meeting diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder (as determined by the MINI, per protocol) decreased from baseline to 9 weeks but the diff erence between Deprexis and control was not statistically signifi cant (p=0•079; appendix A). On the basis of the MINI analysis, the number needed to treat was three. When assessing quality of life, as measured by the WHO-QoL BREF, we saw a treatment diff erence only in the psychological wellbeing subscale (table 2). When assessing the Fatigue Scale For Motor and Cognitive Function (FSMC), we saw improvement with intervention versus control in only the motor fatigue subscale (table 2) but not on cognitive fatigue symptoms (table 2). We saw no diff erence in any of the diseasespecifi c quality-of-life (HAQUAMS) subscales (table 2). On average, patients allocated to the Deprexis group spent 332 min (about 5•5 h) working with the programme (median 310 min; range 50-905). Patient satisfaction with the programme was high and most participants reported that the intervention met or exceeded their expectations (appendix A). Additionally, many of the participants indicated that they would recom mend Deprexis to others with mild-to-moderate depression and specifi cally those with multiple sclerosis. Only a few participants indicated that they needed assistance in handling the programme (n=6, 17%). However, about three-quarters (n=27, 77%) of the participants stated that they had to force themselves to complete all the sessions, and more than half (n=18, 51%) suggested that the programme might require some adjustments to suit the needs of patients with multiple sclerosis. None of the enrolled participants met the predefi ned criterion for acute risk of suicide (response 3a or 3b on SBQ-R item 3 plus score of 5 or 6 on SBQ-R item 4) at baseline or the 9-week assessment. For the low-threshold defi nition using BDI item 9, the criterion was not met by any patient in the Deprexis group (baseline n=0; 9 weeks n=0) but was met in one instance in the control group (n=1; n=1). For SBQ-R item 4, two patients met the lowthreshold criterion at baseline and no patients met it at week 9 in the Deprexis group. In the control group, four patients met this criterion at both baseline and 9 weeks. However, using the low-threshold criteria, we saw no evidence of new occurrences of suicidal ideation during the trial in either group. We saw worsening of depressive symptoms during the trial from below to above the cutoff for caseness (BDI >13) in three patients in the control group but none in the Deprexis group. All 35 patients assigned to Deprexis and included in the 9-week analysis also completed the 6-months' follow-up examination. At 6 months, BDI scores in these participants were lower than at baseline (mean BDI at baseline 19•37 [SD 9•59]; mean BDI at 6 months 14•80 [10•03]; p=0•001).
Procedures Deprexis is an online programme based on principles of CBT. It consists of ten sequential modules-psychoeducation, behavioural activation, cognitive modifi cation, mind fulness and acceptance, interpersonal skills, relaxation, physical exercise and lifestyle modifi cation, problem solving, expressive writing and forgiveness, positive psychology, and emotion-focus interventionsplus an introduction and a summary module. It implements the technique of simulated dialogue by giving the user multiple-choice options and tailors the subsequent options to the patient's responses. The user's responses thus determine the course of each module. Dependent on the user's speed, each module can be completed in less than 60 mins. The programme is described in detail elsewhere. 18 Participants randomly assigned to the control group were off ered full access to Deprexis on completion of the study. Results Patients were enrolled from July 16, 2012, to Oct 22, 2013. We screened 241 patients and randomised 90 to either the Deprexis or the control group (fi gure 1). The number of patients who did not complete the 9-week trial period was similar between the two groups (Deprexis n=10 [22%]; control n=9 [20%]). Baseline characteristics were much the same between the two groups (table 1). Analysis of the primary endpoint BDI showed a statistically signifi cant treatment eff ect of Deprexis (fi gure 2 and table 2). Group diff erences were slightly larger in the mixed models, multiple imputations, and the per-protocol analyses (appendix A). BDI subscale analyses showed signifi cant treatment eff ects on the subdomains of negative attitude towards self and somatic symptoms (table 2). We also analysed the BDI as a categorical variable (BDI 0-13 vs BDI >13) in the per-protocol sample post-hoc analysis). Between baseline and week 9, the number of patients above the cutoff for clinical depression decreased in the Deprexis group and increased in the control group (p for between-group treatment diff erence=0•01; fi gure 3). Based on the BDI categorical analysis, the number needed to treat was eight. 34 participants (Deprexis n=17; control n=17) from the online cohort volunteered to undergo additional psychodiagnostic assessment. In this subsample, we confi rmed a positive treatment eff ect of Deprexis on the BDI (LOCF p=0•047; d=0•75; appendix A). Similarly, depressive symptoms along DSM-IV diagnostic criteria as measured by the IDS showed a signifi cant treatment eff ect (LOCF p=0•02; d=0•95; appendix A). Furthermore, we detected treatment eff ects in the IDS cognitive subscale (LOCF p=0•02, d=0•88) but not in the somatic subscale (appendix A). The proportion of patients meeting diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder (as determined by the MINI, per protocol) decreased from baseline to 9 weeks but the diff erence between Deprexis and control was not statistically signifi cant (p=0•079; appendix A). On the basis of the MINI analysis, the number needed to treat was three. When assessing quality of life, as measured by the WHO-QoL BREF, we saw a treatment diff erence only in the psychological wellbeing subscale (table 2). When assessing the Fatigue Scale For Motor and Cognitive Function (FSMC), we saw improvement with intervention versus control in only the motor fatigue subscale (table 2) but not on cognitive fatigue symptoms (table 2). We saw no diff erence in any of the diseasespecifi c quality-of-life (HAQUAMS) subscales (table 2). On average, patients allocated to the Deprexis group spent 332 min (about 5•5 h) working with the programme (median 310 min; range 50-905). Patient satisfaction with the programme was high and most participants reported that the intervention met or exceeded their expectations (appendix A). Additionally, many of the participants indicated that they would recom mend Deprexis to others with mild-to-moderate depression and specifi cally those with multiple sclerosis. Only a few participants indicated that they needed assistance in handling the programme (n=6, 17%). However, about three-quarters (n=27, 77%) of the participants stated that they had to force themselves to complete all the sessions, and more than half (n=18, 51%) suggested that the programme might require some adjustments to suit the needs of patients with multiple sclerosis. None of the enrolled participants met the predefi ned criterion for acute risk of suicide (response 3a or 3b on SBQ-R item 3 plus score of 5 or 6 on SBQ-R item 4) at baseline or the 9-week assessment. For the low-threshold defi nition using BDI item 9, the criterion was not met by any patient in the Deprexis group (baseline n=0; 9 weeks n=0) but was met in one instance in the control group (n=1; n=1). For SBQ-R item 4, two patients met the lowthreshold criterion at baseline and no patients met it at week 9 in the Deprexis group. In the control group, four patients met this criterion at both baseline and 9 weeks. However, using the low-threshold criteria, we saw no evidence of new occurrences of suicidal ideation during the trial in either group. We saw worsening of depressive symptoms during the trial from below to above the cutoff for caseness (BDI >13) in three patients in the control group but none in the Deprexis group. All 35 patients assigned to Deprexis and included in the 9-week analysis also completed the 6-months' follow-up examination. At 6 months, BDI scores in these participants were lower than at baseline (mean BDI at baseline 19•37 [SD 9•59]; mean BDI at 6 months 14•80 [10•03]; p=0•001).
Outcomes All outcome measures-a set of questionnaires administered online to measure depressive symptoms, quality of life, and fatigue-were obtained at baseline and 9 weeks after enrolment (ie, before and after the 9 week long programme for the Deprexis group and before and after waiting for 9 weeks for the waitlist group). We did a follow-up assessment 6 months after the end of the intervention using the same online platform. Self-report questionnaires obtained online are similar to written questionnaires in terms of reliability and validity, 21 as shown for depression scales including the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI). 22 The primary endpoint of the study was severity of depressive symptoms as measured by the BDI. 23 We analysed the BDI total score (primary endpoint) as well as BDI subscale scores (post-hoc analysis). The secondary endpoints were quality of life, as measured by the WHO Quality of Life scale (WHO-QoL BREF), 24 disease-related quality of life (measured by HAQUAMS), 20 and fatigue (Fatigue Scale For Motor And Cognitive Function; FSMC). 25 We also screened for suicidal ideation and behaviour (with Suicide Behaviors Questionnaire-Revised [SBQ-R]), as a predefi ned safety measure. 26 In the clinical subgroup, patients underwent a structured clinical interview (The Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview; MINI) 27 administered by a trained clinician. They also completed an additional depression questionnaire (Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology; IDS-30SR). 28 In this subgroup, we analysed the IDS total score as well as published IDS cognitive and somatic subscales. 29 To assess treatment adherence we used data from the Deprexis interface, which tracks usage time of each participant. The usage log of Deprexis uses 5-min blocks and excludes each block of inactivity so that the logged usage times is a good estimate of time spent working with the pro gramme. To assess the acceptance of Deprexis by patients, we obtained retrospective appraisal of the pro gramme from participants randomised to the Deprexis group (appendix A). We did not include a data monitoring committee to assess adverse events. However, we collected self-reported data for suicidal ideation and behaviour using the SBQ-R as a predefi ned safety measure. If responses indicated acute risk of suicide (response 3a or 3b on SBQ-R item 3 plus score of 5 or 6 on SBQ-R item 4), patients were provided automatically with emergency contact numbers on the computer screen. To test for incidental evidence of adverse events, we also used a lower threshold for suicidal ideation (score >1 on item 9 of the BDI or score >3 on item 4 of the SBQ-R). We also regarded worsening of depressive symptoms during the trial from below to above the cutoff for so-called caseness for clinical depression (BDI >13) as an adverse event. Results Patients were enrolled from July 16, 2012, to Oct 22, 2013. We screened 241 patients and randomised 90 to either the Deprexis or the control group (fi gure 1). The number of patients who did not complete the 9-week trial period was similar between the two groups (Deprexis n=10 [22%]; control n=9 [20%]). Baseline characteristics were much the same between the two groups (table 1). Analysis of the primary endpoint BDI showed a statistically signifi cant treatment eff ect of Deprexis (fi gure 2 and table 2). Group diff erences were slightly larger in the mixed models, multiple imputations, and the per-protocol analyses (appendix A). BDI subscale analyses showed signifi cant treatment eff ects on the subdomains of negative attitude towards self and somatic symptoms (table 2). We also analysed the BDI as a categorical variable (BDI 0-13 vs BDI >13) in the per-protocol sample post-hoc analysis). Between baseline and week 9, the number of patients above the cutoff for clinical depression decreased in the Deprexis group and increased in the control group (p for between-group treatment diff erence=0•01; fi gure 3). Based on the BDI categorical analysis, the number needed to treat was eight. 34 participants (Deprexis n=17; control n=17) from the online cohort volunteered to undergo additional psychodiagnostic assessment. In this subsample, we confi rmed a positive treatment eff ect of Deprexis on the BDI (LOCF p=0•047; d=0•75; appendix A). Similarly, depressive symptoms along DSM-IV diagnostic criteria as measured by the IDS showed a signifi cant treatment eff ect (LOCF p=0•02; d=0•95; appendix A). Furthermore, we detected treatment eff ects in the IDS cognitive subscale (LOCF p=0•02, d=0•88) but not in the somatic subscale (appendix A). The proportion of patients meeting diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder (as determined by the MINI, per protocol) decreased from baseline to 9 weeks but the diff erence between Deprexis and control was not statistically signifi cant (p=0•079; appendix A). On the basis of the MINI analysis, the number needed to treat was three. When assessing quality of life, as measured by the WHO-QoL BREF, we saw a treatment diff erence only in the psychological wellbeing subscale (table 2). When assessing the Fatigue Scale For Motor and Cognitive Function (FSMC), we saw improvement with intervention versus control in only the motor fatigue subscale (table 2) but not on cognitive fatigue symptoms (table 2). We saw no diff erence in any of the diseasespecifi c quality-of-life (HAQUAMS) subscales (table 2). On average, patients allocated to the Deprexis group spent 332 min (about 5•5 h) working with the programme (median 310 min; range 50-905). Patient satisfaction with the programme was high and most participants reported that the intervention met or exceeded their expectations (appendix A). Additionally, many of the participants indicated that they would recom mend Deprexis to others with mild-to-moderate depression and specifi cally those with multiple sclerosis. Only a few participants indicated that they needed assistance in handling the programme (n=6, 17%). However, about three-quarters (n=27, 77%) of the participants stated that they had to force themselves to complete all the sessions, and more than half (n=18, 51%) suggested that the programme might require some adjustments to suit the needs of patients with multiple sclerosis. None of the enrolled participants met the predefi ned criterion for acute risk of suicide (response 3a or 3b on SBQ-R item 3 plus score of 5 or 6 on SBQ-R item 4) at baseline or the 9-week assessment. For the low-threshold defi nition using BDI item 9, the criterion was not met by any patient in the Deprexis group (baseline n=0; 9 weeks n=0) but was met in one instance in the control group (n=1; n=1). For SBQ-R item 4, two patients met the lowthreshold criterion at baseline and no patients met it at week 9 in the Deprexis group. In the control group, four patients met this criterion at both baseline and 9 weeks. However, using the low-threshold criteria, we saw no evidence of new occurrences of suicidal ideation during the trial in either group. We saw worsening of depressive symptoms during the trial from below to above the cutoff for caseness (BDI >13) in three patients in the control group but none in the Deprexis group. All 35 patients assigned to Deprexis and included in the 9-week analysis also completed the 6-months' follow-up examination. At 6 months, BDI scores in these participants were lower than at baseline (mean BDI at baseline 19•37 [SD 9•59]; mean BDI at 6 months 14•80 [10•03]; p=0•001).
Statistical analysis Power calculation for the trial was based on results obtained from a previously published study using Deprexis in a cohort of patients with psychiatric disorders without comorbid somatic disorders. 18 The pre-post eff ect size observed in that study was d=0•58 and the between-group eff ect size was d=0•64. A power calculation with 80% power and α set at 0•05 with d=0•64 would result in a total sample size of 80 participants. We conservatively estimated the sample size at 100 patients because the eff ect size in psychiatric disorders might not readily be translated to patients with neurological disorders and comorbid depression. Visual inspection of Q-Q plots suggested normal distribution of data. Therefore, we did statistical analyses using parametric tests. According to guidelines for statistical analysis of clinical trials published by the European Medicines Agency (EMA; codes CPMP/ ICH/363/96 and CPMP/EWP/2863/99), we did an intention-to-treat analysis for the primary outcome (BDI) using ANCOVA models. Here, change from baseline (calculated by subtracting pre-treatment scores from post-treatment scores) of the outcome measure was entered as the dependent variable and baseline scores as the covariate. As recommended by EMA, this model did not include treatment by covariate interactions. We treated missing data as last observation carried forward (LOCF) in the primary intention-to-treat analysis. We provide mixed models and multiple imputations (20 imputations using sex, age, group, and baseline BDI as predictors) as sensitivity analyses. We also include an analysis of patients with complete data before and after the treatment period (as per protocol). Raw data of the primary outcome BDI as well as imputed datasets are available in appendix B and appendix C, respectively. We analysed dichotomous endpoints indicating caseness (BDI below vs above the cutoff ; diagnosis of major depressive disorder based on the MINI structured interview) using Cochran's χ² test. All analyses of caseness were restricted to patients in whom caseness was established before and after intervention (as perprotocol sample). We used the categorical analyses to provide estimates for number needed to treat. Type I error was set at 5% and all tests were two-tailed. We provide eff ect sizes as Cohen's d ([change Deprexis minus change WLC] divided by SD of the change score). We used PASW statistics software (version 18.0) for all analyses. This trial is registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, number NCT01663649. Results Patients were enrolled from July 16, 2012, to Oct 22, 2013. We screened 241 patients and randomised 90 to either the Deprexis or the control group (fi gure 1). The number of patients who did not complete the 9-week trial period was similar between the two groups (Deprexis n=10 [22%]; control n=9 [20%]). Baseline characteristics were much the same between the two groups (table 1). Analysis of the primary endpoint BDI showed a statistically signifi cant treatment eff ect of Deprexis (fi gure 2 and table 2). Group diff erences were slightly larger in the mixed models, multiple imputations, and the per-protocol analyses (appendix A). BDI subscale analyses showed signifi cant treatment eff ects on the subdomains of negative attitude towards self and somatic symptoms (table 2). We also analysed the BDI as a categorical variable (BDI 0-13 vs BDI >13) in the per-protocol sample post-hoc analysis). Between baseline and week 9, the number of patients above the cutoff for clinical depression decreased in the Deprexis group and increased in the control group (p for between-group treatment diff erence=0•01; fi gure 3). Based on the BDI categorical analysis, the number needed to treat was eight. 34 participants (Deprexis n=17; control n=17) from the online cohort volunteered to undergo additional psychodiagnostic assessment. In this subsample, we confi rmed a positive treatment eff ect of Deprexis on the BDI (LOCF p=0•047; d=0•75; appendix A). Similarly, depressive symptoms along DSM-IV diagnostic criteria as measured by the IDS showed a signifi cant treatment eff ect (LOCF p=0•02; d=0•95; appendix A). Furthermore, we detected treatment eff ects in the IDS cognitive subscale (LOCF p=0•02, d=0•88) but not in the somatic subscale (appendix A). The proportion of patients meeting diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder (as determined by the MINI, per protocol) decreased from baseline to 9 weeks but the diff erence between Deprexis and control was not statistically signifi cant (p=0•079; appendix A). On the basis of the MINI analysis, the number needed to treat was three. When assessing quality of life, as measured by the WHO-QoL BREF, we saw a treatment diff erence only in the psychological wellbeing subscale (table 2). When assessing the Fatigue Scale For Motor and Cognitive Function (FSMC), we saw improvement with intervention versus control in only the motor fatigue subscale (table 2) but not on cognitive fatigue symptoms (table 2). We saw no diff erence in any of the diseasespecifi c quality-of-life (HAQUAMS) subscales (table 2). On average, patients allocated to the Deprexis group spent 332 min (about 5•5 h) working with the programme (median 310 min; range 50-905). Patient satisfaction with the programme was high and most participants reported that the intervention met or exceeded their expectations (appendix A). Additionally, many of the participants indicated that they would recom mend Deprexis to others with mild-to-moderate depression and specifi cally those with multiple sclerosis. Only a few participants indicated that they needed assistance in handling the programme (n=6, 17%). However, about three-quarters (n=27, 77%) of the participants stated that they had to force themselves to complete all the sessions, and more than half (n=18, 51%) suggested that the programme might require some adjustments to suit the needs of patients with multiple sclerosis. None of the enrolled participants met the predefi ned criterion for acute risk of suicide (response 3a or 3b on SBQ-R item 3 plus score of 5 or 6 on SBQ-R item 4) at baseline or the 9-week assessment. For the low-threshold defi nition using BDI item 9, the criterion was not met by any patient in the Deprexis group (baseline n=0; 9 weeks n=0) but was met in one instance in the control group (n=1; n=1). For SBQ-R item 4, two patients met the lowthreshold criterion at baseline and no patients met it at week 9 in the Deprexis group. In the control group, four patients met this criterion at both baseline and 9 weeks. However, using the low-threshold criteria, we saw no evidence of new occurrences of suicidal ideation during the trial in either group. We saw worsening of depressive symptoms during the trial from below to above the cutoff for caseness (BDI >13) in three patients in the control group but none in the Deprexis group. All 35 patients assigned to Deprexis and included in the 9-week analysis also completed the 6-months' follow-up examination. At 6 months, BDI scores in these participants were lower than at baseline (mean BDI at baseline 19•37 [SD 9•59]; mean BDI at 6 months 14•80 [10•03]; p=0•001).
Role of funding source The funding sources did not play any role in data collection, analysis, and interpretation of the data. The corresponding author had full access to all of the data and the fi nal responsibility to submit for publication. Results Patients were enrolled from July 16, 2012, to Oct 22, 2013. We screened 241 patients and randomised 90 to either the Deprexis or the control group (fi gure 1). The number of patients who did not complete the 9-week trial period was similar between the two groups (Deprexis n=10 [22%]; control n=9 [20%]). Baseline characteristics were much the same between the two groups (table 1). Analysis of the primary endpoint BDI showed a statistically signifi cant treatment eff ect of Deprexis (fi gure 2 and table 2). Group diff erences were slightly larger in the mixed models, multiple imputations, and the per-protocol analyses (appendix A). BDI subscale analyses showed signifi cant treatment eff ects on the subdomains of negative attitude towards self and somatic symptoms (table 2). We also analysed the BDI as a categorical variable (BDI 0-13 vs BDI >13) in the per-protocol sample post-hoc analysis). Between baseline and week 9, the number of patients above the cutoff for clinical depression decreased in the Deprexis group and increased in the control group (p for between-group treatment diff erence=0•01; fi gure 3). Based on the BDI categorical analysis, the number needed to treat was eight. 34 participants (Deprexis n=17; control n=17) from the online cohort volunteered to undergo additional psychodiagnostic assessment. In this subsample, we confi rmed a positive treatment eff ect of Deprexis on the BDI (LOCF p=0•047; d=0•75; appendix A). Similarly, depressive symptoms along DSM-IV diagnostic criteria as measured by the IDS showed a signifi cant treatment eff ect (LOCF p=0•02; d=0•95; appendix A). Furthermore, we detected treatment eff ects in the IDS cognitive subscale (LOCF p=0•02, d=0•88) but not in the somatic subscale (appendix A). The proportion of patients meeting diagnostic criteria for major depressive disorder (as determined by the MINI, per protocol) decreased from baseline to 9 weeks but the diff erence between Deprexis and control was not statistically signifi cant (p=0•079; appendix A). On the basis of the MINI analysis, the number needed to treat was three. When assessing quality of life, as measured by the WHO-QoL BREF, we saw a treatment diff erence only in the psychological wellbeing subscale (table 2). When assessing the Fatigue Scale For Motor and Cognitive Function (FSMC), we saw improvement with intervention versus control in only the motor fatigue subscale (table 2) but not on cognitive fatigue symptoms (table 2). We saw no diff erence in any of the diseasespecifi c quality-of-life (HAQUAMS) subscales (table 2). On average, patients allocated to the Deprexis group spent 332 min (about 5•5 h) working with the programme (median 310 min; range 50-905). Patient satisfaction with the programme was high and most participants reported that the intervention met or exceeded their expectations (appendix A). Additionally, many of the participants indicated that they would recom mend Deprexis to others with mild-to-moderate depression and specifi cally those with multiple sclerosis. Only a few participants indicated that they needed assistance in handling the programme (n=6, 17%). However, about three-quarters (n=27, 77%) of the participants stated that they had to force themselves to complete all the sessions, and more than half (n=18, 51%) suggested that the programme might require some adjustments to suit the needs of patients with multiple sclerosis. None of the enrolled participants met the predefi ned criterion for acute risk of suicide (response 3a or 3b on SBQ-R item 3 plus score of 5 or 6 on SBQ-R item 4) at baseline or the 9-week assessment. For the low-threshold defi nition using BDI item 9, the criterion was not met by any patient in the Deprexis group (baseline n=0; 9 weeks n=0) but was met in one instance in the control group (n=1; n=1). For SBQ-R item 4, two patients met the lowthreshold criterion at baseline and no patients met it at week 9 in the Deprexis group. In the control group, four patients met this criterion at both baseline and 9 weeks. However, using the low-threshold criteria, we saw no evidence of new occurrences of suicidal ideation during the trial in either group. We saw worsening of depressive symptoms during the trial from below to above the cutoff for caseness (BDI >13) in three patients in the control group but none in the Deprexis group. All 35 patients assigned to Deprexis and included in the 9-week analysis also completed the 6-months' follow-up examination. At 6 months, BDI scores in these participants were lower than at baseline (mean BDI at baseline 19•37 [SD 9•59]; mean BDI at 6 months 14•80 [10•03]; p=0•001).
