Method Participants in this study were recruited as they were admitted to four community-based psychosocial rehabilitation programs in urban Los Angeles. The programs were part of a county mandated mental health initiative (Young et al., 1998) and were selected on the basis of data showing that they were comprehensive service environments that yielded significant improvements in functional outcomes over time (Bae et al., 2004;Brekke et al., 1997bBrekke et al.,, 2003)). Participants were assessed at baseline on all study variables and again 12 months later on the functional outcome variables. At baseline, psychosocial and functional status data were generally gathered within two weeks of the neuropsychological and social cognition testing. The psychosocial interviews were completed by trained research interviewers who were blind to the neuropsychological results. Neuropsychological testers were blind to the scores on the psychosocial measures. Results The means and standard deviations of the variables in the path analysis are shown in Table 1. Zero-order correlations of the manifest variables in the path analysis are shown in Table 2. When symptom levels were entered as a covariate into all of the models tested, there was no change in most of the parameters estimated, and in other instances it was negligible; therefore, the results are presented without including the symptom variable in the models.
Subjects The sample consisted of 139 individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder who completed baseline test batteries including neurocognition, social cognition, and psychosocial functioning. Subjects were recruited and followed prospectively for 12 months from between 1996-2000. Fifty-six percent of the subjects came from site 1, 16% from site 2, 16% from site 3, and 12% from site 4. Diagnoses were determined using clinical records, a DSM-IV checklist, and collateral reports from the admitting clinician and on-site psychiatrist. Subjects were excluded if they met criteria for alcohol or drug dependence in the previous six months or if they had an identified neurological disorder. One hundred subjects completed the 12month protocol on the current study variables (72% completion rate at 12 months). There was no statistically significant differential attrition across the program sites. Descriptive data are reported in Table 1. There were no statistically significant differences between the completers and non-completers on the variables in Table 1. All subjects signed an informed consent under protocols approved by the Institutional Review Board at the University of Southern California. (Goodman et al., 1993); total of social, work, and independence subscales. b Expanded Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (Lukoff et al., 1986;Overall and Gorham, 1962). Model fit We used the following six well-recognized fit indices: the v 2 test; the Normed Fit Index (NFI), where values greater than .9 are considered good; the Standardized Root Mean Square Residual (SRMR) where a lower score indicates better fit; Adjusted Goodness-of-Fit Index (AGFI) where above .9 is good fit; the Root Mean Square Error of Approximation (RMSEA) where values of less than .08 are considered good; the Expected Cross-Validation Index (ECVI) where a small ECVI value indicates the model is more likely to cross-validate with a new sample (Loehlin, 1998;Maruyama, 1998).
Measures All psychosocial variables came from data gathered in face-to-face interviews conducted at a place of the subjectTs choosing, typically at a program site or their residence. The interviewers were masters-level clinicians trained using a protocol described in detail (Brekke et al., 1993). They were trained on the Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (Lukoff et al., 1986) using a protocol described in Ventura et al. (1995). The neurocognitive and social cognition data came from laboratory-based assessments in a facility designed for this study. Predictor model The final predictor model is shown in Fig. 2. The proposed path from neurocognition to social competence was not statistically significant (b = .036, t = .35, p N .10), therefore it was eliminated from all further model testing. All of the remaining paths were statistically significant. The increment to v 2 test was not significant between the initial and final predictor model. From Table 3 it can be seen that the fit indices for the final predictor model were strong. These results support the viability of our predictor model and it was used in each of the outcome models tested below.
Psychosocial measures The measure of social competence is a subscale of the Community Adjustment Form (CAF) (Test et al., 1991). The CAF uses trained interviewers to gather behavioral event data from 17 domains of community functioning such as living situation, work and social functioning, family involvement, and medication use. It includes a 10-item scale of prosocial behaviors rated by the interviewer as an indicator of social competence. The behaviors reflect the four components of social skill described by Mueser and Bellack (Mueser and Bellack, 1998): nonverbal, paralinguistic, content, and balance. The intraclass correlation (ICC) used to assess inter-rater reliability was .91, and Cronbach's alpha was .7. The measure of perceived social support came from a self-report social support scale adapted from the Medical Outcomes Study Social Support Survey (Sherbourne and Stewart, 1991). Cronbach's alpha for the scale was .88. The Role Functioning Scale (RFS; Goodman et al., 1993), a scale of choice for this population (Green and Gracely, 1987), is a functional outcome measure that was administered during the CAF interview. Interviewer ratings of work, social functioning, and independent living from the RFS are used for this study, in accordance with procedures described in Brekke et al. (1993). The RFS provides anchored descriptions and captures both the quantity and quality of functioning in that domain. After interview training, the ICC among three interviewers on the RFS items was N.8. In this study, we use the global score (sum of the three items) as well as each individual item as outcome variables. A principal components factor analysis of the three items found a single factor with eigen value greater than 1 that explained 55% of the item variance and supported the use of the global score. Global outcome models Based on each of the fit indices (see Table 3), the global model of concurrent functional status fit the data well. All of the direct effect parameter estimates were in the expected direction and five of seven path estimates were statistically significant. The model explained 21% of the variance in global functional outcome. The direct path from neurocognition to functional outcome was not significant, while the path from social support to outcome was significant at a trend level ( p b .07). Since the direct path from neurocognition to functional outcome was not significant for the global model, each of the specific outcome models was run and in each instance this path was not statistically significant, with the parameter ranging from À .01 to .07, so this path was eliminated from the model. The impact of eliminating this path was minimal on the other parameters, and this was the case for each of the other concurrent outcome models. The final full model explained 21% of the variance in concurrent global functional status (see Fig. 3). The fit indices were strong, and this more parsimonious model fit the data well (see Table 3). The model predicting 12-month global functional outcomes is presented in Fig. 4. Compared to the concurrent model, there was some degradation on most parameters; however, the model explained 14% of the variance in prospective outcomes, still a medium effect size. All of the model fit indices were excellent (see Table 3). These findings support the viability of the model in predicting 12month prospective functional outcomes.
Social cognition measures Affect perception was measured by the following three scales from which the simple sum of correct responses was derived: 1) the Facial Emotion Identification Test (Kerr and Neale, 1993), 2) the Voice Emotion Identification Test (Kerr and Neale, 1993), and 3) the Videotape Affect Perception Test (Bellack et al., 1996). These tests and the procedures for administering them are fully described in Kee et al. (1998). All three require the subject to select one of six basic emotions (i.e., happy, angry, afraid, sad, surprised, and ashamed) that best describes the emotion presented in photographs, on audiotape, or in videotaped scenes of interpersonal situations. Models of distinct outcome domains Concurrent and prospective models predicting the three distinct outcome domains of social, work, and independent living also fit the data very well. In terms of concurrent functional variables, the model explained 19% of the variation in social functioning, 15% of the variation in work functioning, and 11% of the variation in independent living. Considering 12-month functional outcomes, the model explained 10% of the variance in social, work and independent living outcomes. The model fit indices were all in the good to excellent range. These domain specific results suggest that the global model generalizes well from global to the three functional domains. The only consistent difference across functional domains was that social support became a much stronger and statistically significant predictor of social outcomes.
Neurocognitive measures The neurocognitive measure in this study is a composite created to reflect verbal fluency, immediate memory, secondary memory, sustained attention, and mental flexibility. It was derived from five tests by summing the standardized scores. The five tests were the Controlled Oral Word Association Test (Lezak, 1995), the Digit Span Distractibility Test (Oltmanns and Neale, 1975), the California Verbal Learning Test (Delis et al., 1987), the Degraded-Stimulus Continuous Performance Test (Nuechterlein and Asarnow, 1992), and perseverative errors from the Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST;Heaton, 1981). A principal components factor analysis of the five scores found there was a single factor with eigen value above 1 that accounted for over 50% of the total score variance. Model misspecification The fit of a global concurrent outcome model with the variables in miss-specified order (not simply reversed) was tested. v 2 was statistically significant ( p b .001), the NFI was .81, the AGFI was .76, and the SRMR was N .09. These indices represent a notable degradation in model fit from the theoretically specified model and reinforce the importance of the specified ordering of the variables in this model.
Data analysis Path analysis is a method to test the theory-driven causal relationships of constructs in a proposed theoretical model. It can be used in non-experimental contexts with statistical associations, and when combined with theory it is used to test causal structures among variables. It has been used in schizophrenia research to specify paths to relapse (Nuechterlein et al., 1992), as well as to understand the influence of expressed emotion on social adjustment (King and Dixon, 1996). Since it is impossible to meet the specification requirement that all relevant variables be included in the model, it is critical to be theoretically driven in variable selection and to seek high levels of reliability in the measures. The method employs a series of regression equations to determine the direct and indirect effects of variables in the model. The path coefficients are standardized partial regression coefficients that describe numerically to what extent a change in a predictor variable affects a dependent variable with all other variables in the model held constant. Analyses were done with the LISREL 8.50 program (Jo ¨reskog and So ¨rbom, 1993) using the default maximum likelihood procedure to estimate the parameters through iteration. We tested our model in three stages. The first stage examined the model with the four predictor variables, excluding the functional outcomes. This allowed us to examine the empirical viability of the stage one model alone and to trim any statistically non-significant paths so as to avoid starting with paths that would become redundant in the final outcome models. Second, using the predictor model from stage one, we tested the full models of concurrent functional outcomes starting with global outcome, and then proceeding to the specific domains of independent living, social and work functioning. Third, the models were tested using the 12-month prospective functional outcome variables. In testing these prospective models we did not control for baseline functional status as we were not examining change in mean functional scores over time, nor did we expect the impact of the predictors to be empirically unique across baseline and prospective outcomes; in fact, it would be hard to explain how the mechanisms of influence would not be the same at both time points. Direct and indirect effects The direct effects are noted in Fig. 2a-d. The indirect effects are computed by summing the path coefficient products for each indirect path from predictor to outcome. The total effect is figured by adding direct plus indirect effects. Tables 4 and5 present direct, indirect, and total effects in each of the concurrent and prospective models. The pattern and magnitude of direct and indirect effects was very similar for the concurrent and prospective models with two exceptions. The indirect effect of social cognition on global outcome is no longer statistically significant (changing from .06 to .04), while the magnitude of the betas for work outcomes are larger at 12-months compared to baseline.
