Methods Results
Design This was a parallel 2-group RCT comparing MumMoodBooster to TAU. The main outcomes were remission from the depressive episode and severity of symptoms of depression at 12 weeks postenrollment. See Multimedia Appendix 1 for the study's CONSORT-EHEALTH checklist [68]. Sample A total of 178 women began the study registration process (see Figure 3). By the end of the recruitment period, 43 mothers were randomized (24.2% of registrants) to either the MumMoodBooster condition (n=21) or the TAU condition (n=22). Figure 3 details the reasons for attrition between registration and randomization. Twelve weeks following enrollment, two women in the MumMoodBooster condition failed to complete online assessment questionnaires and telephone diagnostic interviews (all women in TAU completed the 12-week assessments). Women in the two conditions appeared comparable in terms of baseline characteristics (Table 1). As recommended by the CONSORT Statement [58], no significance tests of between-group differences were conducted on baseline data.
Recruitment Recruitment occurred between March 2013 and July 2014. Participants were women resident in Australia aged 18 years and older with a child aged less than 1 year. A stepped process was used to recruit eligible participants: initial screening, clinical assessment, baseline data acquisition, and randomization. The research project was available to women across Australia, in both rural and metropolitan areas. Marketing focused on Internet campaigns using Google AdWords, Facebook, and Twitter. The project was also advertised to Maternal and Child Health Centres in Melbourne who were encouraged to direct clients to the project. Messages prompted interested individuals to obtain more information and to begin a screening process by visiting the secure project recruitment website or to call project staff directly. Number of children (including most recent baby), n (%) 7 ( 32 In the MumMoodBooster condition, 20 of 21 women (95%) were diagnosed with current major depression and 1 of 21 women (5%) with minor depression. In the TAU condition, 20 of 22 women (91%) met diagnostic criteria for current major depression and 2 of 22 women (9%) for minor depression (Table 1). The mean age of mothers was close to the most recently available Australian national average (30 years [64]) and their infants averaged just over 6 months of age. The sample contained a higher proportion of women born in Australia than the latest national average (national average=70%) and a lower proportion of first-time mothers (national average=43%). The mean EPDS at screening was 16.2 (SD 2.9), similar to the mean observed in other Australian samples of depressed perinatal women [47]. As reported in studies of major risk factors for PND [65], 67.4% (29/43) of the cohort had experienced a past major depressive episode.
Screening Screening criteria were determined online as follows: Australian residency, 18 years of age or older, English speaking, less than 1 year postpartum, Internet access with regular email use, an Edinburgh Postnatal Depression Scale (EPDS) [34,35] score of 11 to 23, no current treatment for depression (medication or psychotherapy), and a score of less than 3 on item #10 of the EPDS (indicating frequent thoughts of self-harm). Individuals who satisfied screening criteria were emailed a participant information and consent form to complete and return by email. Consenting women were subsequently telephoned by a psychologist/psychology trainee to explain the study and to schedule a clinical assessment. At this stage, women who scored 1 to 2 on item #10 of the EPDS were asked a series of questions following the risk assessment protocol of Simon and colleagues [36] to determine intent, lethality, access to means, and history of suicide attempts. Those deemed to be at risk for suicide were excluded and referred to receive immediate crisis attention. Primary Depression Outcomes In the MumMoodBooster condition, 79% (15/19) of women no longer met DSM-IV criteria for depression at 12 weeks; this was 18% (4/22) in the TAU condition. In the intention-to-treat analysis, a chi-square test revealed a statistically significant between-group difference in the frequency of depressive diagnosis (major or minor depression) at 12-week follow-up (Yates corrected χ 2 1 =10.3, P=.001). Figure 4 shows the proportions on which the intention-to-treat analysis was conducted. Similarly, women in the MumMoodBooster condition also showed reduced severity of depression symptoms, whereas those in the TAU condition displayed little improvement (see Table 2). After controlling for baseline scores, mean depression symptoms on the BDI-II in the intervention group at 12 weeks were significantly lower than that of the TAU group (P=.01) and this represented a large effect size (Table 2). Results for both diagnostic status and BDI-II scores were also statistically significant in observed-case analyses before imputation.
Clinical Assessment and Inclusion/Exclusion Criteria Following initial telephone contact, eligible consenting women were assessed by telephone by a clinical psychologist/psychology trainee using the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID-IV) [37,38]. Inclusion criteria based on the SCID-IV assessment were (1) meeting criteria for a major depressive disorder or (2) meeting criteria for a minor depressive disorder. Exclusion criteria were (1) current substance abuse, (2) current and past manic/hypomanic symptoms, (3) posttraumatic stress disorder, (4) alcohol abuse or dependence, (5) depression with psychotic features, (6) risk of suicide as per risk protocol, and (7) current active treatment for depression (medication or psychotherapy). All assessed women were asked to nominate a contact health professional (eg, a general practitioner) to whom the project could send notification of her diagnosis. RenderX
Baseline Women satisfying all eligibility criteria were told verbally about the unique log-in they could use to complete the baseline (prerandomization) questionnaires. Secondary Outcomes
Randomization Women who completed the baseline assessment questionnaires were randomized immediately online to either MumMoodBooster or to TAU. The randomization procedure used a 1:1 allocation ratio and a pregenerated permuted blocks allocation schedule with the sequence concealed from the researchers consistent with CONSORT standards [39]. Treatment allocation to condition was revealed in a phone call. Women allocated to MumMoodBooster were told verbally about how to begin accessing the program. Given the nature of the intervention, participants could not be blinded to treatment beyond the point of allocation. Trajectory of Depressive Symptoms Figure 5 shows PHQ-9 scores across the study period for both conditions. There was no significant between-condition difference in PHQ-9 scores at baseline. A substantial reduction in PHQ-9 scores occurred from enrollment to 12 weeks in the MumMoodBooster condition (mean 7.2 point drop). However, for the TAU condition, PHQ-9 scores fluctuated slightly with only a small reduction over the same time period (mean 3.3 point drop). A mixed-effects growth model (random intercept model with a linear trajectory) revealed a significant linear decrease in PHQ-9 values for all study participants (estimate=-0.23, SE 0.08, P=.01, partial r =-.22) and a differential trajectory between conditions, with MumMoodBooster participants' scores decreasing (improving) at a greater rate (estimate=-0.34, SE 0.12, P=.01, partial r=-.23).
Treatment Conditions Anxiety and Stress Symptom Severity At baseline, mean anxiety scores were within the normal-to-mild range of severity (0-9). Mean baseline stress scores fell in the moderate range of severity (19)(20)(21)(22)(23)(24)(25). At 9 weeks (immediately posttreatment) and at 12 weeks postenrollment, average symptom severity on the Anxiety scale of the DASS-21 was not significantly lower in the MumMoodBooster condition compared to the TAU condition (Table 2) and represented small effect sizes at both times (d=0.18 and d=0. 27, respectively; see Table 2). Mean symptom severity on the Stress scale of the DASS-21 showed a significant between-group difference favoring the MumMoodBooster condition at 9 weeks, but not at 12 weeks. These differences represented medium effect sizes at both times (see Table 2; d=0.54 and d=0.53, respectively).
MumMoodBooster The structure and content of the MumMoodBooster intervention and its associated websites (partner's website, coach's website, administrative website) have been described in detail elsewhere [13]. Figure 1 shows the structure of the MumMoodBooster program. Treatment consisted of six interactive sessions that were sequentially accessed and designed to encourage optimal engagement and behavior change. For illustration, Multimedia Appendix 2 contains a selection of screenshots from the program. Each session began with an autoplay video introducing session goals and content. Each session presented content using text, animations, video introductions and case vignettes, and audio and video tutorials. The program encouraged participants to personalize their program content, for example by typing in personal lists of pleasant activities, typing in personal goals, and uploading their own photos to be displayed on program webpages. Users could view online and print out a personal workbook summarizing their personalized content. For example, the "my workbook" function gave users feedback on specific strategies that they themselves had identified as helpful together with reminders of how to bring them into play at the earliest warning signs. Self-monitoring tools required participants to enter their own mood and activity data and enabled daily tracking and online charting of both mood and pleasant activities (Figure 2). Initial steps of the program provided explicit direction, whereas later steps encouraged participants to assume greater responsibility for managing their own plan for change. Later sessions commenced by reviewing previous material before presenting new content and concepts. The program's charting function was used to help participants see the functional relation of mood and activity levels. Information from past sessions was used to reinforce gains made, to tailor subsequent program content, and to provide ipsative feedback. Although participants were allowed to set their own pace, of particular importance because women with PND are often overwhelmed by the demands of infant care, the program encouraged the completion of all six sessions at a rate of one session per week. A printable summary was used to describe key content covered in each session and provided a tailored list of recommended home practice activities. Participants were also granted unrestricted access to browse additional "library" articles on relevant topics ranging from relaxation, to problem solving, to parenting support resources. Participants also had unrestricted access to a monitored peer-based Web forum on which they could post, read, and comment on messages from other program participants. Additionally, in recognition of the role of women's partners [40], participants received access to a library article on "You and Your Partner" and were able to send an invitation to their partner to access the related partner support website (separate log-in process for partners) with information on PND. Participants in MumMoodBooster received guided support from a telephone coach to assist and encourage them in their use and practice of particular strategies (coaches were instructed to spend a maximum of 30 minutes per week per participant). There were 7 coaches (3 graduate psychology trainees, 3 clinical psychologists, and 1 health psychologist) who were supported and supervised by 2 senior psychologists. Training for the coaching role involved working through the program (as if they were a participant), reading the coach manual, observing other coaches' complete calls, and a verbal explanation from a senior psychologist about the role and the tasks involved. Content of coaching calls adhered to a manualized script with the defined and limited aims of reinforcing progress; encouraging engagement, practice of strategies, and completion of tasks; and introducing the themes of upcoming sessions. The role of the coaches was only to support mothers in using the program and they were instructed to refrain from giving clinical guidance, but rather to point participants to relevant program content that may address their questions (similar to the "technician" role described by Titov and colleagues [41]). Telephone coaches accessed a secure administrative website to view status reports of participant's program usage to make support and encouragement consistent with progress. Women were also sent automated email prompts as reminders to complete the 12-week online assessment and to encourage visits to the program. Negative Thinking and Behavioral Activation Mean scores for measures of both negative thinking (ATQ) and behavioral activation (BADS) showed some improvement in both the MumMoodBooster and TAU conditions (see Table 3), with medium to large effect sizes favoring the MumMoodBooster condition at 12 weeks postenrollment.
Treatment as Usual Participants in the TAU condition received the same clinical assessment as those in the MumMoodBooster condition. In this condition (as for those in the MumMoodBooster condition), women's nominated health professional received a written notification of the depressive diagnosis that encouraged them to consult with their patient regarding mental health care needs and to form a collaborative care plan with the patient's other relevant health care practitioners. In most cases, women nominated their Maternal and Child Health Nurse (MCHN) or general practitioner (GP) who were then free to treat or to refer to other services/agencies as they judged appropriate, as would normally happen where specialized programs are not available. Therefore, in practice, TAU varied at the discretion of each participant's nominated health professional and was expected to include a heterogeneous mix of interventions/supports. TAU participants were also provided with links to general Internet resources on mental health. They also received the email prompts to complete online assessments. Relationship With Partner and Parenting Self-Efficacy The intervention had no statistically significant effect on partner relationships (DAS-7 scores), although its impact on the parenting self-efficacy measure (PSOC) constituted a medium effect size (Table 3).
Safety Monitoring Safety monitoring was used to provide crisis intervention and referrals to mental health specialty care if needed and a reminder of the emergency contacts provided at baseline assessment. For women in the MumMoodBooster condition, these were carried out by the allocated telephone coach. For women in TAU, a separate safety monitor was allocated (from the same pool of staff as the telephone coaches). All study participants were monitored via safety calls on five occasions: at baseline and at weeks 3, 5, and 9 (immediately posttreatment) and at 12 weeks postenrollment. We used the protocol of Simon et al [36] to check for depressive symptoms and adverse events. If women scored 5 points above their baseline PHQ-9 score at any time, or if they responded positively to the PHQ-9 item on thoughts of self-harm, then a risk assessment was conducted. This included asking about suicidal thoughts/thoughts of self-harm, frequency of thoughts, triggers, plans, means, lethality, intention, protective factors, and history of suicide attempts/self-harm behavior. Engagement in MumMoodBooster Program All women offered the MumMoodBooster intervention (21/21) completed four or more sessions and 86% (18/21) completed all six sessions. Women visited the program on a mean of 20.5 occasions (SD 10.6) and the mean number of sessions attended was 5.7 (SD 0.7). The total time spent using the online program averaged 370 minutes (range 120-1076). Content on the Web forum was viewed, to varying degrees, by all participants and 57% (12/21) posted their own comments to the forum. The mean number of library articles accessed was 4 out of a possible 8. Of the six scheduled coach calls, participants completed a mean 4.3 calls (SD 2.2, range 0-6). A total of 76% (16/21) of participant partners accessed the partner support website.
Measures Measures were administered via online questionnaire or by telephone. Demographic data (eg, age, parity, education, income) were gathered both during telephone assessment and in the online battery of baseline questionnaires. The key depression measures (described subsequently) are well validated and their psychometric properties are well described in general populations. The performance and psychometric properties of both generic and perinatal-specific depression measures used in the context of perinatal populations have been recently reviewed and were the subject of a full health technology report in 2009 [42,43]. Treatment Satisfaction and Helpfulness Of the 21 women in the MumMoodBooster condition, 90% (19/21) provided ratings of the program's satisfaction and the helpfulness of coaching calls. Mean satisfaction ratings were in the moderately satisfied range (mean 3.1, SD 0.60, range 2-4) on a 4-point scale. Similarly, mean ratings of the helpfulness of telephone coach calls were in the moderately helpful range (mean 3.2, SD 0.89, range 1-4) on a 4-point scale.
Primary Depression Outcomes Before completion of baseline questionnaires and at 12 weeks postenrollment, trained diagnostic interviewers conducted the SCID-IV [38] by telephone to determine a DSM-IV diagnosis of major depression or minor depression [44]. Diagnostic interviewers were blinded to treatment allocation at the 12-week time point. At baseline and at 12 weeks postenrollment, severity of depressive symptoms was measured online using the revised Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II) [45]. The BDI-II is a widely used, well-validated, 21-item clinical instrument that measures cognitive, affective, and physiological factors to assess severity of depression. The BDI-II has been used in many studies of perinatal depression [46][47][48][49][50] and has been validated against gold-standard diagnostic criteria in perinatal populations [47]. Use of Other Supports/Treatments At the 12-week assessment, all study participants were asked: "Since you enrolled in the study, which of the following products or programs have you used to manage your mood? (choose all that apply)." A checklist was presented and participants checked the items relevant to their usage. 9) other (please specify). Of the respondents in the MumMoodBooster condition, 32% (6/19) reported that they had accessed one or more sources of support, whereas 81% (17/21) of those in TAU reported using one or more supports while enrolled in the trial; this was a statistically significant difference (continuity corrected χ 2 1 =10.3, P=.002). Figure 6 shows the types of supports accessed in both groups. Of note, individual psychological treatment was reported only by TAU participants, whereas one respondent (5%) in the MumMoodBooster condition reported commencing the use of antidepressant medication compared to 4 (19%) in TAU. More respondents in the TAU group reported having accessed their GP, child health nurse, or pediatrician. Various supports reported by participants, categorized collectively as "other," included Internet research, meditation, telephone helplines, and talking to friends/other mothers. More respondents in the TAU group
Secondary Outcomes Results
Depressive Symptom Trajectory Participants completed the 9-item PHQ-9 [51,52] at enrollment and at weeks 3, 5, 9, and 12 postenrollment. The PHQ-9 was administered over the telephone during the routinely scheduled safety monitoring calls. Sample A total of 178 women began the study registration process (see Figure 3). By the end of the recruitment period, 43 mothers were randomized (24.2% of registrants) to either the MumMoodBooster condition (n=21) or the TAU condition (n=22). Figure 3 details the reasons for attrition between registration and randomization. Twelve weeks following enrollment, two women in the MumMoodBooster condition failed to complete online assessment questionnaires and telephone diagnostic interviews (all women in TAU completed the 12-week assessments). Women in the two conditions appeared comparable in terms of baseline characteristics (Table 1). As recommended by the CONSORT Statement [58], no significance tests of between-group differences were conducted on baseline data.
Anxiety and Stress Symptom Severity Participants' anxiety and stress symptom severity were measured at baseline and at weeks 9 and 12 using the anxiety and stress scales of the Depression, Anxiety and Stress Scales-Short Form (DASS-21) [53]. The DASS-21 is a 21-item, 4-point Likert-type scale. The anxiety and stress scales each have a maximum score of 42 [53]. The DASS manual [53] provides recommended cut-offs for rating the severity of scores as normal, mild, moderate, severe, or extremely severe. Number of children (including most recent baby), n (%) 7 ( 32 In the MumMoodBooster condition, 20 of 21 women (95%) were diagnosed with current major depression and 1 of 21 women (5%) with minor depression. In the TAU condition, 20 of 22 women (91%) met diagnostic criteria for current major depression and 2 of 22 women (9%) for minor depression (Table 1). The mean age of mothers was close to the most recently available Australian national average (30 years [64]) and their infants averaged just over 6 months of age. The sample contained a higher proportion of women born in Australia than the latest national average (national average=70%) and a lower proportion of first-time mothers (national average=43%). The mean EPDS at screening was 16.2 (SD 2.9), similar to the mean observed in other Australian samples of depressed perinatal women [47]. As reported in studies of major risk factors for PND [65], 67.4% (29/43) of the cohort had experienced a past major depressive episode.
Negative Thinking At baseline and at 12 weeks postenrollment, participants were asked to indicate how frequently over the previous week they had negative thoughts using the 30-item Automatic Thoughts Questionnaire (ATQ) [54]. The ATQ asks respondents to rate their agreement with a series of statements (eg, "My life is a mess") using a scale from 1 to 5 (1=not at all; 5=all of the time). Maximum score is 150. Primary Depression Outcomes In the MumMoodBooster condition, 79% (15/19) of women no longer met DSM-IV criteria for depression at 12 weeks; this was 18% (4/22) in the TAU condition. In the intention-to-treat analysis, a chi-square test revealed a statistically significant between-group difference in the frequency of depressive diagnosis (major or minor depression) at 12-week follow-up (Yates corrected χ 2 1 =10.3, P=.001). Figure 4 shows the proportions on which the intention-to-treat analysis was conducted. Similarly, women in the MumMoodBooster condition also showed reduced severity of depression symptoms, whereas those in the TAU condition displayed little improvement (see Table 2). After controlling for baseline scores, mean depression symptoms on the BDI-II in the intervention group at 12 weeks were significantly lower than that of the TAU group (P=.01) and this represented a large effect size (Table 2). Results for both diagnostic status and BDI-II scores were also statistically significant in observed-case analyses before imputation.
Behavioral Activation To measure changes in behavior patterns, at baseline and at 12 weeks postenrollment, women completed the 25-item Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale (BADS) [55]. Respondents rate their agreement with a series of statements (eg, "I stayed in bed for too long even though I had things to do") on a scale from 0 to 6 with a maximum total score for the scale of 150. RenderX
Relationship With Partner Women's relationships with their partners were assessed using the abbreviated 7-item version of the Dyadic Adjustment Scale (DAS-7) [56] at baseline and at 12 weeks postenrollment. The general satisfaction score was calculated as the sum of all items. Maximum score is 36. Secondary Outcomes
Self-Efficacy in Parenting Role At baseline and at 12 weeks postenrollment, we used the Parenting Sense of Competence Scale (PSOC) [57] that asks respondents to rate the extent of their agreement with 7 items designed to assess self-perception of knowledge and competence in the mothering role. Statements (eg, "I honestly believe I have all the skills necessary to be a good mother to my baby") are rated from 1 to 6 (1=strongly disagree; 6=strongly agree). Maximum score is 42. Trajectory of Depressive Symptoms Figure 5 shows PHQ-9 scores across the study period for both conditions. There was no significant between-condition difference in PHQ-9 scores at baseline. A substantial reduction in PHQ-9 scores occurred from enrollment to 12 weeks in the MumMoodBooster condition (mean 7.2 point drop). However, for the TAU condition, PHQ-9 scores fluctuated slightly with only a small reduction over the same time period (mean 3.3 point drop). A mixed-effects growth model (random intercept model with a linear trajectory) revealed a significant linear decrease in PHQ-9 values for all study participants (estimate=-0.23, SE 0.08, P=.01, partial r =-.22) and a differential trajectory between conditions, with MumMoodBooster participants' scores decreasing (improving) at a greater rate (estimate=-0.34, SE 0.12, P=.01, partial r=-.23).
Engagement in MumMoodBooster Program Website analytic tools and database flags allowed us to measure MumMoodBooster program usage in an unobtrusive manner, generating records of number and duration of visits to the website and number of program sessions attended. Anxiety and Stress Symptom Severity At baseline, mean anxiety scores were within the normal-to-mild range of severity (0-9). Mean baseline stress scores fell in the moderate range of severity (19)(20)(21)(22)(23)(24)(25). At 9 weeks (immediately posttreatment) and at 12 weeks postenrollment, average symptom severity on the Anxiety scale of the DASS-21 was not significantly lower in the MumMoodBooster condition compared to the TAU condition (Table 2) and represented small effect sizes at both times (d=0.18 and d=0. 27, respectively; see Table 2). Mean symptom severity on the Stress scale of the DASS-21 showed a significant between-group difference favoring the MumMoodBooster condition at 9 weeks, but not at 12 weeks. These differences represented medium effect sizes at both times (see Table 2; d=0.54 and d=0.53, respectively).
Treatment Satisfaction and Helpfulness Satisfaction with the MumMoodBooster program was assessed using a 4-point Likert scale (1=not at all satisfied; 4=very satisfied). Helpfulness of phone coach calls was similarly assessed using a 4-point Likert scale (1=not at all helpful; 4=very helpful). Negative Thinking and Behavioral Activation Mean scores for measures of both negative thinking (ATQ) and behavioral activation (BADS) showed some improvement in both the MumMoodBooster and TAU conditions (see Table 3), with medium to large effect sizes favoring the MumMoodBooster condition at 12 weeks postenrollment.
Use of Other Supports/Treatments Participants were also asked to provide details of access to other support services and treatments during the study interval. Relationship With Partner and Parenting Self-Efficacy The intervention had no statistically significant effect on partner relationships (DAS-7 scores), although its impact on the parenting self-efficacy measure (PSOC) constituted a medium effect size (Table 3).
Statistical Analysis The primary outcomes were changes in depressive diagnostic status (assessed by the SCID-IV) and depression symptom severity (BDI-II). The categorical outcome (ie, diagnostic status) was analyzed using a contingency table and chi-square test. The continuous outcome (ie, BDI-II) was analyzed in general linear models, which accounted for baseline values as a covariate. Continuous repeated measures data (PHQ-9) were analyzed in mixed-effects growth models using restricted maximum likelihood. Log-likelihood ratio and Akaike information criterion were used to assess model fit. Consistent with CONSORT standards [58,59], all primary analyses involved planned contrasts of the MumMoodBooster condition versus the TAU control condition with all randomized participants analyzed in their allocated treatment condition. For anxiety and stress symptom severity (DASS-21 Anxiety scale and DASS-21 Stress scale), because transformation failed to improve normality, the nonparametric Mann-Whitney U test was used for between-group comparison. Effect sizes were expressed as Cohen's d [60] with 95% confidence intervals. There was some missing data (<5%) on the primary outcomes. Little's missing completely at random (MCAR) test [61] revealed that these data were missing completely at random (χ 2 335 = 303.56, P=.89). Given the minimal and random nature of missing data, the highly conservative "worst-case" imputation method [41] was used for intention-to-treat analysis. This method replaces missing outcome values in the intervention and control conditions with the least favorable and most favorable scores observed within those respective conditions [41], thus providing a sensitivity analysis of the robustness of the observed treatment effect to type I error [62]. Results are presented on the basis of the intention-to-treat analyses. Computations were executed using IBM SPSS Statistics version 22 (IBM Corp, Armonk, NY, USA). Engagement in MumMoodBooster Program All women offered the MumMoodBooster intervention (21/21) completed four or more sessions and 86% (18/21) completed all six sessions. Women visited the program on a mean of 20.5 occasions (SD 10.6) and the mean number of sessions attended was 5.7 (SD 0.7). The total time spent using the online program averaged 370 minutes (range 120-1076). Content on the Web forum was viewed, to varying degrees, by all participants and 57% (12/21) posted their own comments to the forum. The mean number of library articles accessed was 4 out of a possible 8. Of the six scheduled coach calls, participants completed a mean 4.3 calls (SD 2.2, range 0-6). A total of 76% (16/21) of participant partners accessed the partner support website.
Power and Sample Size For the outcome measure of depressive symptom severity (BDI-II), data from a previous trial of CBT [28] for PND provided relevant estimates of variability in baseline scores (mean 23, SD 8.1 points). On this basis, a difference of 6.5 points would be necessary to move mean scores from the "moderately severe" to the "minimal" category of depressive symptoms specified by Beck and colleagues [63] (cut-off between these categories=17 points). We considered this to be the minimum clinically important difference in continuous scores of depression severity [28]. With a power of 0.8 at α=.05, the required n=15.7(8.09/6.5) 2 =24.3, which rounds to 25 per group. Thus, we aimed for a total sample size of N=50 to achieve sufficient power to detect a clinically important difference in the primary measure of depressive symptom severity. Treatment Satisfaction and Helpfulness Of the 21 women in the MumMoodBooster condition, 90% (19/21) provided ratings of the program's satisfaction and the helpfulness of coaching calls. Mean satisfaction ratings were in the moderately satisfied range (mean 3.1, SD 0.60, range 2-4) on a 4-point scale. Similarly, mean ratings of the helpfulness of telephone coach calls were in the moderately helpful range (mean 3.2, SD 0.89, range 1-4) on a 4-point scale.
