Method Power calculations were informed by effect size data (Blackwell & Holmes, 2010). Using a conservative estimate of Cohen's d ϭ 1.00, alpha was set at 0.05 and power at .90. The minimum sample size for each group was identified as 21, but more were recruited to hedge against expected attrition. Participants were recruited via the research arm (virtualclinic.org.au) of the Clinical Research Unit for Anxiety and Depression (CRUfAD), a not-for-profit clinical and research unit in Sydney, Australia. Applicants first completed online screening questionnaires (see the participant flowchart1 in Figure 1). Successful applicants were telephoned for a diagnostic interview using the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview Version 5.0.0 (MINI; Sheehan et al., 1998). 2 The 69 people who completed an electronic informed consent were randomized by an independent person via a true randomization process (www.random.org) to either the intervention (n ϭ 38) or wait-list control (WLC) group (n ϭ 31; see Figure 1). The WLC group completed iCBT after the intervention group had completed all study components. The study was approved by the Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC) of St. Vincent's Hospital in Sydney and the HREC of the University of New South Wales, also in Sydney. The trial was registered as ACTRN12611001221943 and NCT01488058. The Beck Depression Inventory-2nd edition (BDI-II; Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996) and the nine-item Depression Scale of the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9; Kroenke, Spitzer, & Williams, 2001) were the primary outcomes measures of depression severity. The 10-item Kessler Psychological Distress Scale (K10; Kessler et al., 2002) was used to index distress. Interpretation bias was measured with the Ambiguous Scenarios Test-Depression (AST-D; Berna, Lang, Goodwin, & Holmes, 2011) and an electronic version of the Scrambled Sentences Test (SST; Rude et al., 2002). Two versions of the AST-D were presented in counterbalanced order. Secondary outcomes measures included the World Health Organization Disability Assessment Schedule-II (WHO-DAS-II; Üstün et al., 2010), the State Trait Anxiety Inventory-Trait Version (STAI-T; Spielberger, Gorsuch, Lushene, Vagg, & Jacobs, 1983), and the Repetitive Thinking Questionnaire (RTQ10; McEvoy, Mahoney, & Moulds, 2010). Our Treatment Expectancy and Outcomes Questionnaire (adapted from Devilly & Borkovec, 2000) contained these three questions: "At this point, how logical does the program offered to you seem? (0 ϭ Not at all logical to 4 ϭ Very logical), "At this point, how useful do you think this treatment will be in reducing your depression symptoms?" (0 ϭ Not at all useful to 4 ϭ Very useful), and "Overall, how satisfied are you with your treatment?" (1 ϭ Very dissatisfied to 5 ϭ Very satisfied). The CBM-I component consisted of seven sessions (20 min each) of imagery-focused CBM-I completed daily over the course of 1 week (see Blackwell & Holmes, 2010, for details and refer to the Figure 1 for compliance). The iCBT component consisted of the Sadness Program, which has been evaluated in three previous trials (see Titov, Andrews, Davies, et al., 2010), and an effectiveness study conducted in primary care (Williams & Andrews, 2013). The program consists of six online lessons representing best practice CBT as well as regular homework assignments and access to supplementary resources (see Titov, Andrews, Davies, et al., 2010, for details). The entire assessment and intervention was conducted online with no face-to-face contact. All patients first • Started Session1 (n = 32) • Did not start Session 1 (n = 2) (1 terminated at session 1, 1 at session 3, 2 at session 4 due to computer access issues or time constraints) completed primary (BDI-II, PHQ9, K10, AST-D, SST) and secondary (WHODAS-II, STAI-T, RTQ10) baseline measures followed by either the 7-day CBM-I component or the wait list. All patients completed the primary measures after the 7-day intervention phase, followed by either the 10-week iCBT component or the wait list. All patients completed the baseline battery of questionnaires (minus the AST-D and SST) after 10 weeks. The WLC group then commenced deferred treatment (iCBT). Significance testing of group differences regarding demographic data and pretreatment measurements was conducted using analysis of variance and chi-square, where the variables consisted of nominal data. Intent-to-treat marginal models using restricted maximum likelihood estimation were used to account for missing data due to participant dropouts. 3 Significant effects were followed up with pairwise contrasts. Effect sizes were calculated between groups (Hedges g) and within groups (Cohen's d) using the pooled standard deviation. Clinically significant change was defined as high-end state functioning (BDI-II score Ͻ 14) combined with a total score reduction greater than the reliable change index of 7.16 (Jacobson & Truax, 1991). PROCESS was used for indirect effects (Hayes, 2012). 4 Results There were no significant group differences in any of the baseline measures (ts Ͻ 1.86, ps Ͼ .05) or in age, t(61) ϭ 0.35, p Ͼ .05; gender, 2 (1) ϭ 1.00, p Ͼ .05; or medication use, 2 (2) ϭ 1.09, p Ͼ .05 (see Table 1). There were no differences in patients' ratings of treatment expectations (ts Ͻ 1, ps Ͼ .05). Although standard e-mail contact did differ, t(61) ϭ 7.44, p Ͻ .001, due to technical assistance required in the intervention group, the amount of personal contact with the research team did not vary (p Ͼ .05). Marginal models with group as a fixed factor and time as a repeated factor were conducted separately for each of the outcome measures. Results evaluating the independent effects of CBM-I and the combined effects are reported in Table 2. Following CBM-I, the reductions in BDI-II, PHQ-9, and K10 scores in the intervention group were all significant and corresponded to medium-large effects. Between-groups superiority of the intervention group was evident on all measures, corresponding to medium effects. Mean AST-D scores did not differ between groups, but the increase in mean scores (more positive interpretations) in the intervention group was significant, corresponding to a medium effect. There was no significant change in the WLC group. There was no main effect or interaction for SST-Negativity scores. Clinically significant change was evident in 27% (n ϭ 7) of the intervention group compared to 0.07% (n ϭ 2) in the WLC group, 2 (1, 53) ϭ 3.57, p ϭ .05. The indirect effect of change in interpretive bias on depression symptoms was evaluated through simple mediation (Model 4; Hayes, 2012) with group as the independent variable, BDI-II change scores (T1, T2) as the dependent variable, and AST-D change scores as the mediating variable. Results of 5,000 bootstrap resamples demonstrated that the total effect was significant (effect ϭ 5.89, SE ϭ 1.99, t ϭ 2.95, p ϭ .004). The direct effect of group on BDI-II was not significant (p ϭ .09), but critically, the indirect effect of AST-D on the change in BDI-II scores was (effect ϭ 2.31, SE ϭ 1.16), 95% CI [0.71, 5.04]. Normal theory tests of the indirect effect also supported the significant indirect effect of AST-D change scores on the dependent variable (effect ϭ 2.31, SE ϭ 1.16., Z ϭ 1.99, p ϭ .04). Analyses of the combined intervention demonstrated significant reductions in all primary measures (BDI-II, PHQ-9, K10) in the intervention group, corresponding to large effects (see Table 2 and Figure 2). Significant reductions were also observed in the WLC group corresponding to medium effects, but intervention group supe- 3 The assumption that data was missing at random was evaluated by using binary logistic regression to predict dropouts (0 ϭ no dropout, 1 ϭ dropout) and by comparing these two groups on baseline measures. No baseline characteristics differed between the two groups or predicted attrition (all ps Ͼ .05). As the primary outcomes measures (BDI-II, PHQ-9, K10) were collected at three time points, effects were modeled using an autoregressive covariance structure to account for the correlation between the time points. Effects for the secondary measures were modeled using an unstructured covariance structure. Model fit was determined using Schwarz's Bayesian information criterion. 4 This method was chosen over the causal steps approach based on recent research advocating for the use of modern statistical approaches to quantifying intervening variable models. As recommended, particularly for small samples, estimates of indirect effects were generated using bootstrapping analysis (Preacher & Hayes, 2004). In bootstrapping analysis, the most stringent test of an indirect effect (mediation) is if the 95% biascorrected and -accelerated confidence intervals for the indirect effect do not include the value of 0. riority was observed for all measures. For WHODAS-II, STAI-T, and RTQ10, all scores were significantly lower in the intervention group relative to the WLC group, corresponding to medium-large effect sizes. Large within-group effects were observed in the intervention group. Significant reductions were also observed in the WLC group, but intervention group superiority was evident on all measures. Sixtyfive percent (n ϭ 13) of patients in the intervention group evidenced clinically significant change on the BDI-II compared to 36% (n ϭ 8) in the WLC, 2 (1, 42) ϭ 3.43, p ϭ .06. The majority of patients who completed the combined intervention indicated the instructions were either easy or very easy to follow (77%), indicated that CBM-I was at least moderately logical (88%), and rated the quality of the combined intervention as good or excellent (84%). Mean ratings of confidence in recommending the intervention to a friend with depression (1 ϭ not at all confident to 10 ϭ extremely confident) were 7.77 (SD ϭ 2.10).
