Method Participants Subjects in the present study were recruited from the local university workers via an intranet advertisement asking them to participate in a study on how people imagine the future. A total of 210 healthy adults originally indicated their willingness to participate in the study by completing the baseline measures of happiness and anxiety, and were randomly assigned to one of the three experimental groups (positive projection, negative projection, and neutral projection) or to the control group (no projection). Attrition was quite prevalent in the experimental groups. Forty-three participants never started the actual study and another 61 subjects were dropped from data analysis because of missing or incomplete data, 1 leaving a total of 106 participants. This was not surprising given the demanding daily nature of the task and the fact that these subjects were unpaid volunteers. However, there were no group differences in the exclusion/dropout rate for each experimental group ( 2 ¼ 0.42; p ¼ 0.98) and no differences between subjects who dropped out and those who did not regarding their initial level of happiness and anxiety (p ¼ 0.70 and p ¼ 0.85, respectively). The effective sample was made up of 69 women with a mean age of 31.2 years (SD ¼ 10.76) and 37 men with a mean age of 35.03 years (SD ¼ 14.8). The experimental groups were composed of 15 subjects (6 men) for the positive projection group, 16 subjects (7 men) for the negative projection group, and 18 subjects (5 men) for the neutral projection group. The control group was made up of 57 subjects (19 men). All participants gave written, informed consent to participate in the study. Results
Procedure After being given instructions and information about the study procedure, participants were provided with an individual login and password for the study website. Participants were then invited when they first logged on to complete the pre-test, which consisted of an online version of the Subjective Happiness Scale (Lyubomirsky & Lepper, 1999) and of the State Trait Anxiety Inventory (Spielberger, 1983). After that, participants started receiving emails every day with a link to their online daily projection questionnaire. A first, reminding email was sent to every participant at 5 p.m. and another one was sent at 8 p.m. to participants who had not yet completed their questionnaire. Participants had to complete their daily questionnaire between 5 p.m. and midnight for 15 consecutive days. The first day was considered a practice day and was not counted in the observation period, resulting in a total of 14 daily reports that were used in the analyses. Finally, participants were contacted by email and asked to complete once again the happiness and anxiety scales on the day following their last daily questionnaire (post-test). Manipulation check As a reminder, participants were asked to rate for each projection emotions they would experience if the event were actually taking place. In order to check whether each experimental condition (i.e., positive projection, negative projection, and neutral projection) effectively elicited differential emotional valence in projections, a one-way analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted with the mean daily rating of emotional content of projections as the dependent variable and the three experimental conditions as the three levels of the independent variable. The means and standard deviations of the mean emotion of projections are depicted in Table 1. Results showed that the manipulation was effective, as the three experimental groups effectively differed on the emotional content of their daily projections (F(2, 46) ¼ 198.48, p50.0001). Post hoc comparisons revealed that the positive group significantly differed from the negative (p50.001) and the neutral group (p50.001), and the negative group significantly differed from the neutral group (p50.001). In addition, there were no significant differences between the four groups regarding their basic level of happiness (F(3, 102) ¼ 0.31, p ¼ 0.82) and anxiety (F(3, 102) ¼ 1.40, p ¼ 0.25).
Conditions Beside the control group that did no intervention and just had to complete the happiness and anxiety scales twice in a 15-day interval, participants were randomly assigned by the website program to one of the three experimental conditions (positive, negative, or neutral projections) and were provided with one of the three following instructions: (1) 'Please try to imagine, in the most precise way, four positive events that could reasonably happen to you tomorrow. You can imagine all kinds of positive events, from simple everyday pleasures to very important positive events.' Examples of positive events imagined by participants were as follows: 'Before going to bed I could get an SMS from my ex-boyfriend,' 'I can see myself savoring meatballs and French fries at the Rendez-Vous Cafe´with my friend Evelyne right after our Pilates workout at the gym', and 'After a great job interview, the boss of the company I applied to work for will tell me I got the job. (2) 'Please try to imagine in the most precise way, four negative events that could reasonably happen to you tomorrow. You can imagine all kinds of negative events, from everyday hassles to very important negative events.' Examples of negative events imagined by participants were as follows: 'My hairdresser will ruin my hair tomorrow while I'm already in a hurry for Julie's wedding,' 'When I take a shower tomorrow morning, the water will suddenly turn very cold for a few seconds,' and 'My doctor will inform me that he just got the results of the medical exam and that my recent sight problem is caused by a tumor.' (3) 'Please try to imagine, in the most precise way, four neutral and routine events that could reasonably happen to you tomorrow. Imagined events have to be things really neutral that you are used to doing such as taking a shower, tying your shoe laces, or turning on your computer.' Examples of neutral events imagined by participants were as follows: 'waking up at 9 a.m.,' 'borrowing my friend's cognitive neuroscience book,' 'taking the bus to work', and 'brushing my teeth.' Depending on the condition, one of these instructions was written on the daily questionnaire, followed by general additional instructions reminding participants that imagined events had to be specific (i.e., they had to take place in a specific place at a specific moment) and inviting them to take the time to think of elements, namely, phenomenal characteristics, such as where and when the event could take place, the people and objects surrounding, other sensory details such as sounds or smells, and emotions they could feel. Instructions were followed by four blank text boxes for participants to write a brief summary of their future projections. For each projection, participants were also asked to rate emotions they would experience if the event was actually taking place, on a 7-point scale ranging from À3 (extremely negative) to þ3 (extremely positive). Subjective happiness Scores on subjective happiness scales for each group before and after 2 weeks of daily projection are presented in Figure 1. A two-way, repeated-measures ANOVA with the factor of time as within factor and with projection condition as between-subjects factor was conducted. Results shows a significant effect of time (F(1, 102) ¼ 7.87, p50.01) and a significant interaction (F(3, 102) ¼ 2.87, p ¼ 0.04). Comparisons yielded a significant increase in happiness for the positive projection group (F(1, 102) ¼ 8.13, p50.01). Modifications in the level of happiness after the 2-week program for the negative projection group (F(1, 102) ¼ 2.59, p ¼ 0.11), the neutral projection group (F(1, 102) ¼ 0.58, p ¼ 0.45), and the control group (F(1, 102) ¼ 0.18, p ¼ 0.67) were not significant.
Happiness Happiness was assessed by a French back-translated version of the Subjective Happiness Scale (Lyubomirsky & Lepper, 1999). The measure is composed of four items and uses a 7-point Likert-type scale. Examples of items include 'Compared to most of my peers, I consider myself ( from 1 ¼ less happy to 7 ¼ more happy)' or 'Some people are generally not very happy. Although they are not depressed, they never seem as happy as they might be. To what extent does this characterization describe you? ( from 1 ¼ not at all to 7 ¼ a great deal). ' Lyubomirsky and Lepper (1999) reported good internal consistency with alpha () ranging from 0.79 to 0.94. The internal consistency of the French translation of the scale used in our sample was also good with of 0.81. Anxiety Mean STAI scores for each group before and after the 2-week daily projection are presented in Figure 2. A two-way, repeated-measures ANOVA with the factor of time as within factor and with projection condition as between-subjects factor was conducted. Results yielded no significant effect of time (F(1, 102) ¼ 3.13, p ¼ 0.08) and no significant interaction either (F(3, 102) ¼ 1.24, p ¼ 0.30). Because there is a trend toward significance for an effect of time, additional comparisons were conducted. These analyses revealed a significant reduction of anxiety in the neutral projection group (F(1, 102) ¼ 5.64, p50.02) but no significant changes in the positive group (F(1, 102) ¼ 0.11, p ¼ 0.75), the negative group (F(1, 102) ¼ 0.14, p ¼ 0.71), or the control group (F(1, 102) ¼ 2.90, p ¼ 0.09).
Anxiety Anxiety was assessed with the State-Trait Anxiety Inventory (STAI) (Spielberger, 1983). The STAI consists of two 20-item scales: the state and trait anxiety scales. The trait anxiety (STAI-T) scale was used in the current study and long-term manifestations of anxiety. Items are rated on a 4-point Likert scale (from 'almost never,' to 'almost always'). The validated French version of the STAI has excellent internal consistency and high retest reliability (Schweitzer & Paulhan, 1990). The Cronbach's alpha () for the STAI-T in the current study was 0.94. Results
