Material and methods Results The experimental sample consisted of 231 young people with 113 (49%) males and 118 (51%) females and a mean age of 13.5 years (s.d. = 0.9). Results obtained on Barlett's test indicated a chi-squared value of 1365.62, df = 15 (p < 0.001) and a KMO value of 0.824 suggesting the items were suitable for Factor Analysis. Two EFA were conducted on items for the two separate scales. The results obtained from the EFA for the E-VS suggested a single-factor structure based on the Scree Plot methods in conjunction with the selection criteria of an Eigen value > 1.0. Of the 6 items, 1 attained a factor loading less than 0.3. After removal of the unqualified items and re-submission of the data for further EFA, 5 items remained in the scale yielding a single-factor structure with the factor loading ranged from 0.635% to 0.854% and 47% of variance explained (Table 1). The same approach was applied to the E-BS with the initial 6 items subjected to the EFA resulting in a 2-factor structure. As shown in Table 1, each factor was endorsed with 3 items. According to the contents of items extracted these factors were named as ''Mild E-bullying'' and ''Serious E-bullying'' with factor loading ranged from 0.315 to 0.998. This 2-factor structure explained 55.8% of the total variance in the data with no crossloading of any items was observed. To confirm the factorial validity of these scales, separate CFA were then conducted on each scale using the test sample of 234 adolescents with 121 (52%) males, and a mean age of 13.5 years (s.d. = 0.9). The single model of the E-VS with 5 items was then fitted to the data and the model was confirmed by the CFA. Similarly a 2-factor model of the E-BS with 6 items was also fitted to the data of the test sample (see Fig. 1). To further examine the goodness-offit of these models to the data, model diagnostics were obtained and results were presented in Table 2. The goodness-of-fit results on a single-factor model for the E-VS and a 2-factor model for the E-BS provided evidence for a satisfactory good-fit of these models to the data with most statistics successfully meeting the pre-set criteria (Table 2). The internal reliability or consistency of the E-VS and each subscale of the E-BS and the total scales was examined by calculating the Cronbach's alpha values for males and females. The results were summarised in Table 3. As shown, on the whole these values were large, except for the Mild E-bullying subscale of the E-BS for females, ranging from 0.93 to 0.97 for males and 0.55 to 0.87 for females. There were no statistically significant differences in all values between males and females, except for the Mild E-bullying subscale, suggesting the internal reliability of these factors on the whole was not affected by sex. The inter-correlation between the two subscales of the E-BS was 0.02 (p > 0.100). Results on the convergent validity of the E-VS and E-BS were also presented in Table 3. The E-VS, subscales of the E-BS, and the total E-BS were positively and significantly correlated with CES-DC. The E-VS was positively and significantly related to SAS, but not E-BS subscales nor the total scale. There was a significant and positive correlation between E-VS and the total scale of E-BS (r = 0.69, p < 0.001).
Sample and procedure The sample was generated using a two-stage random clustering sampling technique. First, 5 different high schools were randomly selected from the list of high schools in the city of Kaifeng located in the Henan Province. Second, one or two classes were selected randomly from each school with all students in the class recruited in the sample. As a result, a sample of 484 adolescents aged between 11-16 years was included in this validation study. The sample consisted of 244 (50.4%) males and 240 (49.6%) females with a mean age of 13.5 years (s.d. = 0.9), and 67% (n = 325) aged younger than 14 years. The survey was conducted on campus at different schools within the same week. Selected students were invited to participate in the survey via school principals and their teachers, and were encouraged to fill in a self-reported questionnaire designed specifically for the study. Consent was implicated by a voluntarily response to the questionnaire. Institute ethics approval for the study was granted by the Human Ethics committee of the Henan University. For psychometric analytical studies two sub-samples, the experimental (for an exploratory study) and test (for a confirmatory study) samples, were generated randomly from the whole sample with similar age and sex distributions. Results The experimental sample consisted of 231 young people with 113 (49%) males and 118 (51%) females and a mean age of 13.5 years (s.d. = 0.9). Results obtained on Barlett's test indicated a chi-squared value of 1365.62, df = 15 (p < 0.001) and a KMO value of 0.824 suggesting the items were suitable for Factor Analysis. Two EFA were conducted on items for the two separate scales. The results obtained from the EFA for the E-VS suggested a single-factor structure based on the Scree Plot methods in conjunction with the selection criteria of an Eigen value > 1.0. Of the 6 items, 1 attained a factor loading less than 0.3. After removal of the unqualified items and re-submission of the data for further EFA, 5 items remained in the scale yielding a single-factor structure with the factor loading ranged from 0.635% to 0.854% and 47% of variance explained (Table 1). The same approach was applied to the E-BS with the initial 6 items subjected to the EFA resulting in a 2-factor structure. As shown in Table 1, each factor was endorsed with 3 items. According to the contents of items extracted these factors were named as ''Mild E-bullying'' and ''Serious E-bullying'' with factor loading ranged from 0.315 to 0.998. This 2-factor structure explained 55.8% of the total variance in the data with no crossloading of any items was observed. To confirm the factorial validity of these scales, separate CFA were then conducted on each scale using the test sample of 234 adolescents with 121 (52%) males, and a mean age of 13.5 years (s.d. = 0.9). The single model of the E-VS with 5 items was then fitted to the data and the model was confirmed by the CFA. Similarly a 2-factor model of the E-BS with 6 items was also fitted to the data of the test sample (see Fig. 1). To further examine the goodness-offit of these models to the data, model diagnostics were obtained and results were presented in Table 2. The goodness-of-fit results on a single-factor model for the E-VS and a 2-factor model for the E-BS provided evidence for a satisfactory good-fit of these models to the data with most statistics successfully meeting the pre-set criteria (Table 2). The internal reliability or consistency of the E-VS and each subscale of the E-BS and the total scales was examined by calculating the Cronbach's alpha values for males and females. The results were summarised in Table 3. As shown, on the whole these values were large, except for the Mild E-bullying subscale of the E-BS for females, ranging from 0.93 to 0.97 for males and 0.55 to 0.87 for females. There were no statistically significant differences in all values between males and females, except for the Mild E-bullying subscale, suggesting the internal reliability of these factors on the whole was not affected by sex. The inter-correlation between the two subscales of the E-BS was 0.02 (p > 0.100). Results on the convergent validity of the E-VS and E-BS were also presented in Table 3. The E-VS, subscales of the E-BS, and the total E-BS were positively and significantly correlated with CES-DC. The E-VS was positively and significantly related to SAS, but not E-BS subscales nor the total scale. There was a significant and positive correlation between E-VS and the total scale of E-BS (r = 0.69, p < 0.001).
Materials The conceptualisation of the scales and the formation of the item pool were based on the Aggression and Victimisation Scale (AVS) by Orpinas and Horne (2006). The AVS is a well-developed and validated short tool designed specifically to assess bullying behaviour and victimisation among adolescents. Items for the E-Victimisation and E-Bullying Scales were generated based on ideas obtained from the AVS. These items were then pooled together to form the initial item bank. Items in the bank were then further screened by the authors for their suitability to be included in the initial scales according to the situation in China. As a result 12 items, 6 for the E-VS and 6 for the E-BS, were included for psychometric analyses. As a self-reported instrument, these scales adopted the format of the original AVS which asks respondents to indicate the frequency of occurrences of certain situations to them or how often respondents perform certain behaviour in the last 7 days prior to the survey. As a 7-day time period was used in the original VAS, the E-VS and E-BS also employed the same time period for ease of international comparison. A response set with a rating from 0 to 6 corresponding to a range of 0 times to 6 times or more was used. These items were then incorporated in the survey questionnaire in conjunction with other measuring instruments. To examine the convergent validity of E-VS and E-BS, the Chinese version of the Centre for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale for Children (Weissman, Orvaschel, & Padian, 1980), and the Zung Self-rating Anxiety Scale (Zung, 1965) were also included. All these instruments were properly translated using the forward and backward translation procedures, validated, and widely used among the Chinese adolescent population. Included in the questionnaire was demographic information, such as age and sex of students for sub-group analyses. Fig. 1. Factor structure obtained from the confirmatory factor analysis using path analysis approach. Results The experimental sample consisted of 231 young people with 113 (49%) males and 118 (51%) females and a mean age of 13.5 years (s.d. = 0.9). Results obtained on Barlett's test indicated a chi-squared value of 1365.62, df = 15 (p < 0.001) and a KMO value of 0.824 suggesting the items were suitable for Factor Analysis. Two EFA were conducted on items for the two separate scales. The results obtained from the EFA for the E-VS suggested a single-factor structure based on the Scree Plot methods in conjunction with the selection criteria of an Eigen value > 1.0. Of the 6 items, 1 attained a factor loading less than 0.3. After removal of the unqualified items and re-submission of the data for further EFA, 5 items remained in the scale yielding a single-factor structure with the factor loading ranged from 0.635% to 0.854% and 47% of variance explained (Table 1). The same approach was applied to the E-BS with the initial 6 items subjected to the EFA resulting in a 2-factor structure. As shown in Table 1, each factor was endorsed with 3 items. According to the contents of items extracted these factors were named as ''Mild E-bullying'' and ''Serious E-bullying'' with factor loading ranged from 0.315 to 0.998. This 2-factor structure explained 55.8% of the total variance in the data with no crossloading of any items was observed. To confirm the factorial validity of these scales, separate CFA were then conducted on each scale using the test sample of 234 adolescents with 121 (52%) males, and a mean age of 13.5 years (s.d. = 0.9). The single model of the E-VS with 5 items was then fitted to the data and the model was confirmed by the CFA. Similarly a 2-factor model of the E-BS with 6 items was also fitted to the data of the test sample (see Fig. 1). To further examine the goodness-offit of these models to the data, model diagnostics were obtained and results were presented in Table 2. The goodness-of-fit results on a single-factor model for the E-VS and a 2-factor model for the E-BS provided evidence for a satisfactory good-fit of these models to the data with most statistics successfully meeting the pre-set criteria (Table 2). The internal reliability or consistency of the E-VS and each subscale of the E-BS and the total scales was examined by calculating the Cronbach's alpha values for males and females. The results were summarised in Table 3. As shown, on the whole these values were large, except for the Mild E-bullying subscale of the E-BS for females, ranging from 0.93 to 0.97 for males and 0.55 to 0.87 for females. There were no statistically significant differences in all values between males and females, except for the Mild E-bullying subscale, suggesting the internal reliability of these factors on the whole was not affected by sex. The inter-correlation between the two subscales of the E-BS was 0.02 (p > 0.100). Results on the convergent validity of the E-VS and E-BS were also presented in Table 3. The E-VS, subscales of the E-BS, and the total E-BS were positively and significantly correlated with CES-DC. The E-VS was positively and significantly related to SAS, but not E-BS subscales nor the total scale. There was a significant and positive correlation between E-VS and the total scale of E-BS (r = 0.69, p < 0.001).
Psychometric analyses The psychometric properties, including the validity and reliability, of both scales were examined in this study. To determine whether the items were suitable for factor analysis, Barlette's test of sphericity and the Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin (KMO) measure of sample adequacy were used. Factorial validity was investigated initially using Exploratory Factor Analysis (EFA) for each scale using the experimental sample. Data of the experimental sample were subject to the EFA using the Maximum Likelihood method for covariance structure analysis with Varimax rotation. A selection criterion of an Eigen value > 1.0 was used for the rejection of inappropriate factors. Furthermore, the acceptable number of factors was also determined empirically by the Scree Plot method (Cole, 1987). A factor loading value of 0.30 was used as selection criteria for the retention of items. Any items with a factor loading of 0.3 or larger on two or more factors were also deemed to be unacceptable. After removal of each item from the initial scales, the EFA was re-run to determine changes in the factor structure. These procedures were repeated until no more items were rejected. To further examine the factorial structure, Confirmatory Factor Analysis (CFA) was conducted using the path analysis approach with the Maximum Likelihood methods on the test sample for each scale. To examine the goodness-of-fit of the factorial model to the data, multiple criteria were used. These included the Reduced Chisquared statistics (v 2 /df), Goodness-of-fit Index (GFI), the Adjusted GFI (AGFI), and the Root Mean-Square Residual (RMSR) with a GFI > 0.850, AGFI > 0.800, and RMSR < 0.06 (Jöreskog & Sörbom, 1986). To determine internal reliability, Cronbach's alpha coefficients for the E-VS and each sub-scale of the E-BS by sex in the test sample were calculated. Comparisons on internal reliability coefficients between males and females were conducted using Wald Chi-squared tests. Convergent validity was also examined with inter-instrument correlations between each of the two scales and CES-DC as well as SAS using the test sample. The rationale for using the CES-DC and SAS for the convergent validity assessment was based on the literature that there were significant associations between bullying victimisation and depression and anxiety (Fitzpatrick et al., 2010;McMahon et al., 2010). Data were analysed using the SPSS 18.0 and AMOS 17.0 softwares. A significance level of 5% was used for all tests of hypothesis. Results The experimental sample consisted of 231 young people with 113 (49%) males and 118 (51%) females and a mean age of 13.5 years (s.d. = 0.9). Results obtained on Barlett's test indicated a chi-squared value of 1365.62, df = 15 (p < 0.001) and a KMO value of 0.824 suggesting the items were suitable for Factor Analysis. Two EFA were conducted on items for the two separate scales. The results obtained from the EFA for the E-VS suggested a single-factor structure based on the Scree Plot methods in conjunction with the selection criteria of an Eigen value > 1.0. Of the 6 items, 1 attained a factor loading less than 0.3. After removal of the unqualified items and re-submission of the data for further EFA, 5 items remained in the scale yielding a single-factor structure with the factor loading ranged from 0.635% to 0.854% and 47% of variance explained (Table 1). The same approach was applied to the E-BS with the initial 6 items subjected to the EFA resulting in a 2-factor structure. As shown in Table 1, each factor was endorsed with 3 items. According to the contents of items extracted these factors were named as ''Mild E-bullying'' and ''Serious E-bullying'' with factor loading ranged from 0.315 to 0.998. This 2-factor structure explained 55.8% of the total variance in the data with no crossloading of any items was observed. To confirm the factorial validity of these scales, separate CFA were then conducted on each scale using the test sample of 234 adolescents with 121 (52%) males, and a mean age of 13.5 years (s.d. = 0.9). The single model of the E-VS with 5 items was then fitted to the data and the model was confirmed by the CFA. Similarly a 2-factor model of the E-BS with 6 items was also fitted to the data of the test sample (see Fig. 1). To further examine the goodness-offit of these models to the data, model diagnostics were obtained and results were presented in Table 2. The goodness-of-fit results on a single-factor model for the E-VS and a 2-factor model for the E-BS provided evidence for a satisfactory good-fit of these models to the data with most statistics successfully meeting the pre-set criteria (Table 2). The internal reliability or consistency of the E-VS and each subscale of the E-BS and the total scales was examined by calculating the Cronbach's alpha values for males and females. The results were summarised in Table 3. As shown, on the whole these values were large, except for the Mild E-bullying subscale of the E-BS for females, ranging from 0.93 to 0.97 for males and 0.55 to 0.87 for females. There were no statistically significant differences in all values between males and females, except for the Mild E-bullying subscale, suggesting the internal reliability of these factors on the whole was not affected by sex. The inter-correlation between the two subscales of the E-BS was 0.02 (p > 0.100). Results on the convergent validity of the E-VS and E-BS were also presented in Table 3. The E-VS, subscales of the E-BS, and the total E-BS were positively and significantly correlated with CES-DC. The E-VS was positively and significantly related to SAS, but not E-BS subscales nor the total scale. There was a significant and positive correlation between E-VS and the total scale of E-BS (r = 0.69, p < 0.001).
