Method Participants Three hundred and ninety-six adolescents (173 boys, 219 girls, 4 did not provide information on gender) from one middle and one high school in Singapore participated in this study. Age of the participants ranged from 12 to 18 years (M = 14.88, SD = 1.79). Of the 396 adolescents, 51% were from the middle school (n = 202), while 49% were from the high school (n = 194). Self-reported ethnic identification for the sample was as follows: 60.4% of the participants were Chinese, 8.1% were Indian, 19.7% were Malay, 11.6% endorsed Others (ethnic groups not listed), and 0.2% was missing data. Both schools are governments schools situated within residential estates, and government schools are the most common type of schools in Singapore. In Singapore, the state is the principal provider of education at elementary, middle and high school levels, as well as tertiary levels. Government schools are public schools and these are registered and managed by the Ministry of Education, Singapore. Results Table 2 contains means, standard deviations, and correlations for all the study variables. The percentages of boys and girls involved in cyberbullying were 23.6 and 15.1%, respectively. For males, 19.9% were classified as infrequent bullies and 3.7% were classified as frequent bullies. For females, 14.2% were classified as infrequent bullies and 0.9% were classified as frequent bullies. Table 3 presents the results from the hierarchical multiple regression analysis. In Step 1, results indicated that low affective empathy was associated with higher cyberbullying. Results in Step 2 showed no significant two-way interactions. Results of Step 3 indicated that a significant three-way interaction, DR 2 = .03, DF (1, 384) = 10.78, p \ .01, b = -.26. We plotted the 3-way interaction and tested the statistical significance of slope differences among all 6 pairs of slopes (see Fig. 1) using procedures suggested by Aiken and West [32]. Of the 6 pairs of slopes, the slope difference between (1) and ( 3) Analyses of slope differences suggest that at low affective empathy, both boys and girls who also had low cognitive empathy had higher scores on cyberbullying than those who had high cognitive empathy. At high affective empathy, for boys, a similar pattern was found; those with low cognitive empathy had higher cyberbullying scores than those who had high cognitive empathy. However, for girls with high affective empathy, high or low levels of cognitive empathy resulted in indistinguishable levels of cyberbullying. Gender was coded 0 for girls and 1 for boys; both affective and cognitive empathy were centered using the sample mean prior to creating interaction terms and entering them into the regression equations
Measures Results Table 2 contains means, standard deviations, and correlations for all the study variables. The percentages of boys and girls involved in cyberbullying were 23.6 and 15.1%, respectively. For males, 19.9% were classified as infrequent bullies and 3.7% were classified as frequent bullies. For females, 14.2% were classified as infrequent bullies and 0.9% were classified as frequent bullies. Table 3 presents the results from the hierarchical multiple regression analysis. In Step 1, results indicated that low affective empathy was associated with higher cyberbullying. Results in Step 2 showed no significant two-way interactions. Results of Step 3 indicated that a significant three-way interaction, DR 2 = .03, DF (1, 384) = 10.78, p \ .01, b = -.26. We plotted the 3-way interaction and tested the statistical significance of slope differences among all 6 pairs of slopes (see Fig. 1) using procedures suggested by Aiken and West [32]. Of the 6 pairs of slopes, the slope difference between (1) and ( 3) Analyses of slope differences suggest that at low affective empathy, both boys and girls who also had low cognitive empathy had higher scores on cyberbullying than those who had high cognitive empathy. At high affective empathy, for boys, a similar pattern was found; those with low cognitive empathy had higher cyberbullying scores than those who had high cognitive empathy. However, for girls with high affective empathy, high or low levels of cognitive empathy resulted in indistinguishable levels of cyberbullying. Gender was coded 0 for girls and 1 for boys; both affective and cognitive empathy were centered using the sample mean prior to creating interaction terms and entering them into the regression equations
Basic Empathy Scale The questionnaire is a 20-item measure [21] assessing cognitive and affective empathy using a 5-point Likert format. Exploratory factor analyses (EFA) was initially used, and confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) subsequently verified a 2-factor solution. The cognitive empathy subscale assesses the understanding of another person's emotions (e.g., ''I can usually figure out when people are happy''). The affective empathy subscale assesses the sharing and feeling of another person's emotion (e.g., ''Other people's feeling affect me easily''). Cronbach's alpha was .75 for the cognitive subscale and .76 for the affective subscale for the present sample. Cyberbullying Questionnaire A 9-item cyberbullying questionnaire was developed to measure cyberbullying behavior in this study. This included items on broadcasting (e.g., ''I made fun of someone by sending/posting stories, jokes or pictures about him/her''), online actions targeted at the person (e.g., ''I purposely left someone out from an online group''), and deception (e.g., ''I pretended to be someone else and sent/posted messages to get that person into trouble or make that person look bad''). Adolescents could indicate on a 5-point scale whether they engaged in these cyberbullying acts ''once or twice this year'', ''a few times this year'', ''about once every week'', ''about a few times every week'' or if they have ''never'' bullied others. A total cyberbullying score can be calculated. All items measured the prevalence and frequency of cyberbullying in the current school year, with higher scores indicating greater prevalence and frequency of such acts. In addition, adolescents who did not report any cyberbullying acts were classified as ''non-bullies'', those who reported engaging in cyberbullying acts a couple to a few times a year were classified as ''infrequent bullies'', while those who reported weekly or more cyberbullying acts were classified as ''frequent bullies''. The questionnaire was administered 11 months into the school year which was close to the end of the entire the school year. The Cronbach alpha reliability estimate obtained for the present sample was .83. Both EFA and CFA were used in the development and initial validation of the 9-item cyberbullying questionnaire. The authors randomly divided the full sample (n = 396) into two, using EFA to assess the factor structure on Sample A (n = 198) and subsequently using CFA to confirm the factor structure obtained from EFA using Sample B (n = 198). Multigroup CFA was used to test for invariance across gender following procedures outlined by Byrne [27]. Principal components analysis with varimax rotation was performed on the scores of the 9-item cyberbullying questionnaire using Sample A. We based the decision about number of factors to retain on a combination of methods (e.g., parallel analysis, eigenvalue [1.0, scree plots) as well as interpretability, theoretical salience of the factors, and simple structure. Items should load greater than .4 on the relevant factor and less than .4 on all other factors. Results supported a one-factor model. We used CFA on Sample B to test the 1-factor 9-item cyberbyllying questionnaire structure obtained from EFA, using EQS Version 6.1 [28]. Correlated errors and other post hoc model respecification were not permitted. The Satorra-Bentler rescaled v 2 (SBv 2 ) was used because of multivariate non-normality and robust maximum likelihood estimation was employed in CFA to correct for this [29]. The SBv 2 has been found to perform consistently well across small and large samples, and researchers have recommended its use for nonnormal multivariate data [30]. The SBv 2 provided a conventional measure of model fit in which a statistically non-significant chi-square value is expected of models considered to be well-fitting. Results indicated that the model fit was good, SBv 2 (27, N = 198) = 32.26, p = .22. To test for invariance across gender, we obtained the best-fitting models of each group independently [27]. The model for boys was good, SBv 2 (27, N = 173) = 27.42, p = .44. Likewise, the model for girls was good, SBv 2 (27, N = 219) = 26.55, p = .49. A test of equal form with no equality constraints imposed on the parameters was first established. Subsequently, in a sequential manner, factor loadings and factor variance were constrained to be equal across boys and girls. Because the difference between two robust scaled chisquare statistics is not itself distributed as chi-square, chi-square differences were adjusted appropriately with Satorra and Bentler's [31] correction. The degree of invariance is typically assessed by the Dv 2 value (or DSBv 2 value) between two nested models. A statistically nonsignificant difference between the two models would be evidence of invariance across groups. Results suggested invariance of form, factor loadings, and factor variance of the 1-factor cyberbullying questionnaire across gender (see Table 1). This cyberbullying questionnaire was subsequently used in the present research. Results Table 2 contains means, standard deviations, and correlations for all the study variables. The percentages of boys and girls involved in cyberbullying were 23.6 and 15.1%, respectively. For males, 19.9% were classified as infrequent bullies and 3.7% were classified as frequent bullies. For females, 14.2% were classified as infrequent bullies and 0.9% were classified as frequent bullies. Table 3 presents the results from the hierarchical multiple regression analysis. In Step 1, results indicated that low affective empathy was associated with higher cyberbullying. Results in Step 2 showed no significant two-way interactions. Results of Step 3 indicated that a significant three-way interaction, DR 2 = .03, DF (1, 384) = 10.78, p \ .01, b = -.26. We plotted the 3-way interaction and tested the statistical significance of slope differences among all 6 pairs of slopes (see Fig. 1) using procedures suggested by Aiken and West [32]. Of the 6 pairs of slopes, the slope difference between (1) and ( 3) Analyses of slope differences suggest that at low affective empathy, both boys and girls who also had low cognitive empathy had higher scores on cyberbullying than those who had high cognitive empathy. At high affective empathy, for boys, a similar pattern was found; those with low cognitive empathy had higher cyberbullying scores than those who had high cognitive empathy. However, for girls with high affective empathy, high or low levels of cognitive empathy resulted in indistinguishable levels of cyberbullying. Gender was coded 0 for girls and 1 for boys; both affective and cognitive empathy were centered using the sample mean prior to creating interaction terms and entering them into the regression equations
Consent and Procedure The Research Ethics Board at the Division of Psychology, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore, approved the study. Approval was also obtained from the Ministry of Education in Singapore and the schools prior to conducting the research. Parental consent was obtained via letters and forms sent home and subsequently returned to the schools. Adolescent assent was obtained in person. The participation rate was 93.6%. The questionnaire was administered in English as English is the main language of instruction for schools in Singapore. Results Table 2 contains means, standard deviations, and correlations for all the study variables. The percentages of boys and girls involved in cyberbullying were 23.6 and 15.1%, respectively. For males, 19.9% were classified as infrequent bullies and 3.7% were classified as frequent bullies. For females, 14.2% were classified as infrequent bullies and 0.9% were classified as frequent bullies. Table 3 presents the results from the hierarchical multiple regression analysis. In Step 1, results indicated that low affective empathy was associated with higher cyberbullying. Results in Step 2 showed no significant two-way interactions. Results of Step 3 indicated that a significant three-way interaction, DR 2 = .03, DF (1, 384) = 10.78, p \ .01, b = -.26. We plotted the 3-way interaction and tested the statistical significance of slope differences among all 6 pairs of slopes (see Fig. 1) using procedures suggested by Aiken and West [32]. Of the 6 pairs of slopes, the slope difference between (1) and ( 3) Analyses of slope differences suggest that at low affective empathy, both boys and girls who also had low cognitive empathy had higher scores on cyberbullying than those who had high cognitive empathy. At high affective empathy, for boys, a similar pattern was found; those with low cognitive empathy had higher cyberbullying scores than those who had high cognitive empathy. However, for girls with high affective empathy, high or low levels of cognitive empathy resulted in indistinguishable levels of cyberbullying. Gender was coded 0 for girls and 1 for boys; both affective and cognitive empathy were centered using the sample mean prior to creating interaction terms and entering them into the regression equations
Data Analytic Plan A hierarchical multiple regression analysis was performed with cyberbullying scores as the dependent variable. In Step 1, the main effects of affective empathy, cognitive empathy, and gender were entered. Two-way and three-way interactions were entered in Steps 2 and 3, respectively. Gender was dummy coded as 0 for girls and 1 for boys, and both affective and cognitive empathy were centered using the sample mean prior to creating and entering the interaction terms into the equations. The testing, probing and interpretation of interaction effects followed methods outlined by Aiken and West [32]. Results Table 2 contains means, standard deviations, and correlations for all the study variables. The percentages of boys and girls involved in cyberbullying were 23.6 and 15.1%, respectively. For males, 19.9% were classified as infrequent bullies and 3.7% were classified as frequent bullies. For females, 14.2% were classified as infrequent bullies and 0.9% were classified as frequent bullies. Table 3 presents the results from the hierarchical multiple regression analysis. In Step 1, results indicated that low affective empathy was associated with higher cyberbullying. Results in Step 2 showed no significant two-way interactions. Results of Step 3 indicated that a significant three-way interaction, DR 2 = .03, DF (1, 384) = 10.78, p \ .01, b = -.26. We plotted the 3-way interaction and tested the statistical significance of slope differences among all 6 pairs of slopes (see Fig. 1) using procedures suggested by Aiken and West [32]. Of the 6 pairs of slopes, the slope difference between (1) and ( 3) Analyses of slope differences suggest that at low affective empathy, both boys and girls who also had low cognitive empathy had higher scores on cyberbullying than those who had high cognitive empathy. At high affective empathy, for boys, a similar pattern was found; those with low cognitive empathy had higher cyberbullying scores than those who had high cognitive empathy. However, for girls with high affective empathy, high or low levels of cognitive empathy resulted in indistinguishable levels of cyberbullying. Gender was coded 0 for girls and 1 for boys; both affective and cognitive empathy were centered using the sample mean prior to creating interaction terms and entering them into the regression equations
