Methods Results
Intervention To increase the SMA of slightly to moderately frail older people, and influence their subjective well-being, we developed a bibliotherapy, which was called ''GRIP on life''. This bibliotherapy was introduced as a correspondence course on how to maintain a firm grip on life with increasing age. It consisted of five different parts, each composed of 11-19 pages, which were printed one-sided in black and white. For the layout of the text, we hired a graphic design agency with experience in the field of health care interventions (e.g., [24]). The contents of the different parts were all based on the theoretical framework behind SMA [15]. In each part, information about SMA was given, alternated with examples of fictive individuals to illustrate the importance of SMA in daily life. Furthermore, exercises were given to evaluate one's own situation. These exercises first contained the request to list one's activities in a particular domain of physical or social well-being, for example, ''I engage in the following activities to relax . . .'' Blank spaces were left so participants could write down their answers. Next, participants were asked to evaluate whether these activities were satisfactory, for example, ''In your opinion, do you obtain enough relaxation?'' Subsequently, information was offered on how to improve one's SMA in those physical and psychosocial domains that participants were not satisfied with. The core message of this information was repeated in a separate text box. Each part ended with an exercise in which the new abilities could be practiced. To make sure that our target population would perceive the bibliotherapy as clear and relevant, we formed a focus group of older people to evaluate its contents prior to our experiment. In discussions with this target group, we discovered that the part addressing status appeared to be highly susceptible to social desirability. The target group associated the need for status with negative personality characteristics like arrogance and self-display, and were unwilling to engage in exercises aimed at increasing status. Because it was hard at that moment to find a suitable format to address status, this dimension of well-being was omitted from the final version of the bibliotherapy. Part 1 focused on the ability of having a positive frame of mind. We based this part on elements of the Rational Emotive Therapy by Ellis [25]. The participants were asked to list their thoughts, to analyze whether these thoughts were excessively negative, and if so, to replace them with more positive thoughts. In part 2, we addressed the importance of self-efficacy and taking initiative. The importance of goal setting was stressed, and ways were given to overcome the barriers to one's goal, for example, by not making goals too big, by taking small steps, and by trying to have faith in the things one wishes to achieve. Furthermore, the participants were taught to formulate a plan of action [26], which contains a specific description of what one is going to do, and when one is going to do it. Part 3 was about the importance of taking initiative and of self-efficacy with regard to comfort and stimulation. The participants were encouraged to think about new ways of attaining these physical dimensions of well-being. At the end of this part, they formulated an attainable plan of action to actually pursue these goals in the following week. Part 4 focused on the importance of taking initiative and of self-efficacy with regard to affection and behavioural confirmation. Again, the participants were asked to think of ways to attain these social dimensions of well-being, and to follow their plans of action. The fifth, and last, part was about the importance of variety and investment. The participants were asked to think about substitutes for their favourite activities or persons. If substitution was lacking, the participants were encouraged to explore new activities or ways of meeting new people. Multifunctionality was addressed throughout the bibliotherapy by offering examples of how physical and social dimensions of well-being can be combined. Evaluation of the self-management intervention To examine how the experimental group regarded the self-management bibliotherapy, we asked them to answer a few questions concerning their views of each part. Furthermore, we left some spaces on each questionnaire for the participants to write down their personal remarks. In general, participants did not evaluate the five parts very differently. As shown in Table 3, most participants indicated that they liked the different parts and the assignments, and that they did not perceive the text, the assignments and the exercise at the end of each part as difficult. Furthermore, most participants indicated that they more or less learned from the assignments, that the parts made them more or less reflect on things. However, they also said that the parts did not contain much information that was new to them. With regard to the personal remarks that the participants wrote down, some participants indicated that the bibliotherapy made them reflect more on their present lives: ''A course that gives you food for thought . . . I enjoyed it a lot''. Some participants indicated that they had actually changed their behavior as a consequence of the bibliotherapy: ''My life was becoming a routine, but I kicked myself in the pants'' ''After part 2, I started making lists of the things I still want or have to do. Crossing them off makes me feel satisfied''. Others indicated that they would use the bibliotherapy again in the future: ''I will certainly keep the course close at hand in the difficult months to come'' and ''This course is never finished, I will continue thinking about it. I believe it can help me to shape the events in my life more consciously''. One participant succeeded extremely well in summarizing the intent of our bibliotherapy: ''A lot of good advice for some, and a confirmation for others''. Of course, we also received some negative responses. Some participants indicated that they did not recognize the problems we addressed: ''I think the examples are rather exaggerated'', or that they were already familiar with ways of overcoming them: ''In my opinion, this course does not fit me very well. I already know about and apply the things that are in it''. Some people indicated that the bibliotherapy did not address certain subjects that were important to them: ''I have the feeling that my wife and children were not given enough weight in this bibliotherapy'' and ''I missed a connection with the church and religion, things that are of great importance to the lives of many people''. Although there were some people who perceived the bibliotherapy as being too easy: ''I can't help saying this, but the intellectual standard of this course is not particularly high'', fortunately, only a few people perceived the bibliotherapy as being too complicated.
Procedure In August 2001, a questionnaire was sent to a random sample of 3000 community-dwelling older people aged 65 years and older. The addresses of this community sample were randomly drawn from the register of six municipalities in the north of The Netherlands. These municipalities consist of smaller and larger sites and have an individual income comparable to the national mean. All municipalities selected at random the addresses of 500 community-dwelling older people aged 65 years and older. From the 45% of the addressees who returned the questionnaire (N = 1338), a selection was made of respondents who scored slightly to moderately frail (score 1 until 5) on the Groningen Frailty Indicator (GFI; see Section 2). These older people (N = 825) were approached with the request to participate in the intervention. If they were willing to participate, they were asked to return a pretest. Of the persons who were approached, 22% returned the pre-test (N = 193). For purposes of randomisation, these pretests were numbered in the order in which they came in. Subsequently, participants receiving an odd number were assigned to the experimental condition, while participants receiving an even number were assigned to the control condition. The 97 participants that were assigned to the experimental condition received the bibliotherapy right away, while the 96 participants that were assigned to the control condition were told that they were on a waiting list, and would receive the bibliotherapy in 6 months. The experimental group received a new part of the bibliotherapy every 2 weeks. Before they received the following part, they had to return a short questionnaire on the features of SMA that were addressed in the previous part. This was to make sure that participants would actually complete the bibliotherapy, and to get an idea of how they appreciated it. The control group received similar questions concerning features of SMA every so often, to counteract the effects of a possible attention bias and the priming of SMA concepts among the participants in the experimental group. After the participants in the experimental group had finished the bibliotherapy, both groups received the first post-test. Six months after this first post-test had been sent, both groups received the second post-test. Testing the hypotheses
Sample 2.3.1. Experimental group After completion of the pre-test, 97 older people were randomly assigned to the experimental group. Eighty-two percent of these older people completed the bibliotherapy (N = 79). Reasons given for not completing the bibliotherapy were health problems, being too busy, and not perceiving the bibliotherapy as relevant to one's own situation. Forty-two percent of the participants who completed the bibliotherapy was male and 58% was female, which was about the same distribution as in the original sample assigned to the experimental group. The average age of the participants was 72.91 (S.D. = 6.20), the oldest participant being 91 years old. All participants in the experimental group were slightly to moderately frail (score 1 until 5 on the GFI; see Section 2.4), which mainly signified a high level of psychosocial problems, in combination with minor physical problems. Table 1 shows the characteristics of the experimental and the control group on the physical, cognitive and psychosocial dimensions of frailty. All the participants who completed the bibliotherapy returned the first post-test, with 98% also returning the second post-test (N = 77). Self-management ability First, we did an ANOVA using repeated measures to test the effectiveness of our bibliotherapy in increasing SMA. We found a main effect of time of measurement, F(2,314) = 3.16, p < 0.05, with respondents reporting the highest level of SMA at the pre-test (M = 21.48), and lower levels at the time of the first (M = 21.36) and the second post-tests (M = 21.10). As we expected, there was a significant interaction between time of measurement and condition, F(2,314) = 6.28, p < 0.01. This interaction effect was found when the first post-test was contrasted with the pre-test, F(1,157) = 10.43, p < 0.01, d = 0.52, and when the second post-test was contrasted with the pre-test, F(1,157) = 4.64, p < 0.05, d = 0.4. As shown in Table 2, the experimental group showed an increase in SMA at the time of the first post-test (M = 21.73) as compared to the pretest (M = 21.20), while the control group showed a decrease in SMA at the time of the first post-test (M = 20.96) as compared to the pre-test (M = 21.50). This difference in increase between the experimental and the control group still existed at the time of the second post-test (M experimental group = 21.27; M control group = 20.94). Our hypotheses that the bibliotherapy would have a positive effect on SMA in slightly to moderately frail elderly, and that this positive effect would remain after 6 months, were confirmed.
Control group After completion of the pre-test, 96 older people were randomly assigned to the control group. Ninety percent of these older people returned the two-weekly questionnaires on features of SMA (N = 86). Reasons given for not returning the questionnaires on SMA were health problems and perceiving the questions as unpleasant. Thirty-five percent of the participants who returned the questionnaires on SMA was male and 64% was female, which was about the same distribution as in the original sample assigned to the control group. The average age of the participants was 73.71 (S.D. = 6.24), the oldest participant being 91 years old. As in the experimental group, participants' level of frailty mainly constituted of a high level of psychosocial problems, in combination with minor physical problems (see Table 1). All the participants who returned the two-weekly questionnaires on SMA also returned the first post-test, with 95% returning the second post-test (N = 82). Mastery To verify whether the positive effect of our bibliotherapy would also hold for a less specific, but more established measure of successful self-management, we did an ANOVA using repeated measures on different measures of mastery. We did not find a main effect of the time of measurement of mastery, F(2,314) = 2.52, p = ns, nor did we find a significant interaction effect between time of measurement and condition overall, F(2,314) = 2.30, p = ns. However, this interaction effect did reach significance when only the first post-test of mastery was contrasted with the pre-test, F(1,157) = 4.4, p < 0.05, d = 0.31. As shown in Table 2, the level of mastery of the experimental group remained about the same at the time of the first post-test (M = 3.47) as compared to the pre-test (M = 3.46), while the control group showed a decrease in mastery at the time of the first post-test (M = 3.36) as compared to the pre-test (M = 3.53). This difference between the experimental and the control group ceased to exist at the time of the second post-test: when the second post-test of mastery was contrasted with the pretest, we found no significant interaction between time of measurement and condition, F(1,157) = 0.16, p = ns.
Measures Subjective well-being To test our prediction that participants in the experimental condition would show more maintenance of well-being than participants in the control condition, we first entered pre-test SPF-IL into the regression equation to control for differences in SPF-IL scores between both groups at the time of the pre-test (see Table 2). As shown in Table 4, Our hypothesis that the intervention would have a positive effect on overall subjective well-being was confirmed. According to Baron and Kenny [31], three conditions have to be met in order to establish the mediation of SMA between condition and overall subjective well-being. First, the independent variable must affect the mediator, that is, there has to be an effect of condition (bibliotherapy versus control) on post-test SMA. As shown by the ANOVA with repeated measures of SMA, this first condition was met. Second, the independent variable must affect the dependent variable, that is, there has to be an effect of condition on subjective well-being. As shown by the second step of the regression analysis on the scores of the SPF-IL at the time of the first post-test, this second condition was met as well. Third, the mediator must affect the dependent variable, causing the effect of the independent variable to become smaller. To test whether this last condition could be met, post-test SMA was entered into the regression equation. This yielded a significant increase of 14% in explained variance of post-test well-being, DF(1,161) = 65.21, p < 0.001. As shown in Table 4, there was a significant main-effect of posttest SMA (b = 0.4, p < 0.001), with higher levels of posttest SMA resulting in higher levels of post-test well-being. Furthermore, the main effect of condition on overall subjective well-being decreased to a non-significant level after post-test SMA was entered into the regression equation. Our hypothesis that the effect of condition on post-test SPF was mediated by post-test SMA could be confirmed. To test the longitudinal effects of our bibliotherapy, we did an identical hierarchical regression analysis of the SPF-IL scores at the second post-test. However, the experimental condition did not yield a significant increase in explained variance of the SPF-IL at the time of the second post-test, DF(1,156) = 0.34, p = ns. Our hypothesis that the positive effect of the bibliotherapy on overall subjective well-being would still exist after 6 months was not confirmed.
Frailty To determine the levels of frailty of the participants, we used the Groningen Frailty Indicator [27]. This is a simple questionnaire designed to screen older people for beginning physical, cognitive, and psychosocial problems. An example of a physical item is ''Are you able to do your shopping single handed without any help?'' An example of a psychosocial item is ''Do you sometimes miss people around you?'' The GFI consists of 15 items, which can be answered with ''yes'' or ''no''. Additionally, the psychosocial items and an item on memory complaints can be answered with ''sometimes''. Answers indicating a high level of frailty were assigned one point and answers indicating a low level of frailty were assigned zero points. The answer ''sometimes'' was assigned one point for the psychosocial items, and zero points for the item on memory complaints. These points were summed, which resulted in a range from 0 (not frail) to 15 (severely frail). The GFI has shown to be an internally consistent scale with positive indications of construct and clinical validity. The clinical assessment of frailty level by a panel of geriatric experts corresponded with scale-scores on the GFI. These experts considered a GFI-score of 5 or higher as moderately to severely frail [28]. Results
Measure of self-management ability. To measure SMA, we used the Self-Management Ability-Scale [22]. This scale consists of six subscales, one for every aspect of SMA, and each subscale contains five items. The overall scale's internal consistency was 0.90. Within the subscales of taking initiative, investing, self-efficacy, variety, and multifunctionality, the different abilities are related to the physical and social dimensions of well-being described in the social production function theory by Lindenberg [20]. The ability 'having a positive frame of mind' is considered a more general cognitive frame, therefore its subscale is not directly related to specific dimensions of well-being. The average sum score for the SMA-S ranges from 5 to 30, with a higher score meaning higher SMA. Evaluation of the self-management intervention To examine how the experimental group regarded the self-management bibliotherapy, we asked them to answer a few questions concerning their views of each part. Furthermore, we left some spaces on each questionnaire for the participants to write down their personal remarks. In general, participants did not evaluate the five parts very differently. As shown in Table 3, most participants indicated that they liked the different parts and the assignments, and that they did not perceive the text, the assignments and the exercise at the end of each part as difficult. Furthermore, most participants indicated that they more or less learned from the assignments, that the parts made them more or less reflect on things. However, they also said that the parts did not contain much information that was new to them. With regard to the personal remarks that the participants wrote down, some participants indicated that the bibliotherapy made them reflect more on their present lives: ''A course that gives you food for thought . . . I enjoyed it a lot''. Some participants indicated that they had actually changed their behavior as a consequence of the bibliotherapy: ''My life was becoming a routine, but I kicked myself in the pants'' ''After part 2, I started making lists of the things I still want or have to do. Crossing them off makes me feel satisfied''. Others indicated that they would use the bibliotherapy again in the future: ''I will certainly keep the course close at hand in the difficult months to come'' and ''This course is never finished, I will continue thinking about it. I believe it can help me to shape the events in my life more consciously''. One participant succeeded extremely well in summarizing the intent of our bibliotherapy: ''A lot of good advice for some, and a confirmation for others''. Of course, we also received some negative responses. Some participants indicated that they did not recognize the problems we addressed: ''I think the examples are rather exaggerated'', or that they were already familiar with ways of overcoming them: ''In my opinion, this course does not fit me very well. I already know about and apply the things that are in it''. Some people indicated that the bibliotherapy did not address certain subjects that were important to them: ''I have the feeling that my wife and children were not given enough weight in this bibliotherapy'' and ''I missed a connection with the church and religion, things that are of great importance to the lives of many people''. Although there were some people who perceived the bibliotherapy as being too easy: ''I can't help saying this, but the intellectual standard of this course is not particularly high'', fortunately, only a few people perceived the bibliotherapy as being too complicated.
Mastery To measure the more general concept of control, we used the mastery scale by Pearlin and Schooler [23]. This is a brief scale, consisting of seven items (a = 0.74), which measures the amount of control people experience over their lives. Answers could be given on a five-point scale, with a higher score indicating a higher sense of mastery. As expected, this scale was significantly related to the SMA-S, with the Pearson's correlation between both scales ranging from 0.19 up to 0.36 at the different times of measurement (i.e., the pre-test, and the first and the second post-tests). Testing the hypotheses
Subjective well-being To measure overall subjective well-being, we used the 15 item version (a = 0.80) of the SPF-Index Level Scale (SPF-IL [29]). This scale integrates both affective and cognitive components of well-being. It consists of five subscales, each representing one of the dimensions of well-being from the SPF theory [20]. An example of a question for affection is ''Do people pay attention to you?'' Answers could be given on a four-point scale, ranging from never (1) to always (4). Table 2 contains the descriptive statistics (means, standard deviations) for the experimental and the control group on the SMA-S, mastery, and SPF-IL at the time of the pre-test, and the first and the second post-test. Self-management ability First, we did an ANOVA using repeated measures to test the effectiveness of our bibliotherapy in increasing SMA. We found a main effect of time of measurement, F(2,314) = 3.16, p < 0.05, with respondents reporting the highest level of SMA at the pre-test (M = 21.48), and lower levels at the time of the first (M = 21.36) and the second post-tests (M = 21.10). As we expected, there was a significant interaction between time of measurement and condition, F(2,314) = 6.28, p < 0.01. This interaction effect was found when the first post-test was contrasted with the pre-test, F(1,157) = 10.43, p < 0.01, d = 0.52, and when the second post-test was contrasted with the pre-test, F(1,157) = 4.64, p < 0.05, d = 0.4. As shown in Table 2, the experimental group showed an increase in SMA at the time of the first post-test (M = 21.73) as compared to the pretest (M = 21.20), while the control group showed a decrease in SMA at the time of the first post-test (M = 20.96) as compared to the pre-test (M = 21.50). This difference in increase between the experimental and the control group still existed at the time of the second post-test (M experimental group = 21.27; M control group = 20.94). Our hypotheses that the bibliotherapy would have a positive effect on SMA in slightly to moderately frail elderly, and that this positive effect would remain after 6 months, were confirmed.
Statistical analysis Analysis of variance (ANOVA) with repeated measures was used to test the effectiveness of our bibliotherapy in increasing SMA and mastery. The measures of SMA and mastery were considered to be repeated measures of the within-subjects factor time of measurement (pre-test versus first post-test versus second post-test). Condition was considered as a between-subjects factor (coded +1 for the experimental condition and À1 for the control condition). The F-ratio was used to test the significance of mean differences between conditions. We used Cohen's d to describe the magnitude of group differences. This measure of effect size was calculated by subtracting the mean difference score (post-treatment À pre-treatment) of the control group from that of the experimental group, and dividing their difference by the pooled standard deviation. A hierarchical regression analysis was performed to test the effect of our bibliotherapy on subjective well-being, and to verify whether this effect was mediated by SMA. This analysis was preferred above an analysis of variance, as performed on SMA and mastery, because an ANOVA does not combine all the relevant testing into a single analysis [30]. In the first step of the regression analysis, pre-test scores on the SPF-IL were entered into the regression equation; in the second step, condition was entered; and in the third step, SMA at the time of the first post-test was entered. Because we had a clear expectation about the way in which the results of the experimental and the control group would differ, all effects were tested one-tailed. Mastery To verify whether the positive effect of our bibliotherapy would also hold for a less specific, but more established measure of successful self-management, we did an ANOVA using repeated measures on different measures of mastery. We did not find a main effect of the time of measurement of mastery, F(2,314) = 2.52, p = ns, nor did we find a significant interaction effect between time of measurement and condition overall, F(2,314) = 2.30, p = ns. However, this interaction effect did reach significance when only the first post-test of mastery was contrasted with the pre-test, F(1,157) = 4.4, p < 0.05, d = 0.31. As shown in Table 2, the level of mastery of the experimental group remained about the same at the time of the first post-test (M = 3.47) as compared to the pre-test (M = 3.46), while the control group showed a decrease in mastery at the time of the first post-test (M = 3.36) as compared to the pre-test (M = 3.53). This difference between the experimental and the control group ceased to exist at the time of the second post-test: when the second post-test of mastery was contrasted with the pretest, we found no significant interaction between time of measurement and condition, F(1,157) = 0.16, p = ns.
