Methodology Results and Discussion
Sample A total of 588 male and female students in grades 7 and 8 from an urban (n = 185) and a suburban (n = 403) school responded to the our Survey of Internet Risk and Behavior during a regularly scheduled school activity period. The urban school population was 9 percent Asian American, 7 percent African American, 11 percent Hispanic, and 73 percent Caucasian. The district where the school was located scored 40 percent in reading proficiency, 33 percent in math proficiency, and 27 percent in writing proficiency on a state standardized test. The suburban school district achieved a higher level of proficiency, reaching 74 percent in reading, 67 percent in math, and 57 percent in reading on the state standardized test. The school population was less than 1 percent American Indian, less than 1 percent Asian American, 1 percent African American, 1 percent Hispanic, and 97 percent Caucasian. Social Networking Experiences and Opinions Table 1 contains the response percentages for the students' ratings of their social networking experiences and opinions. Inspection of the data for some key items indicates that only 10 percent of the students had been bullied by another student at home while online (item 1). Although the majority (53%) of students were not sure if their friends' parents were aware of what they were doing online, 70 percent of the students felt that their parents knew about their social networking sites (item 7). According to 74 percent of the students, their friends used social networking sites like MySpace or Facebook. Although roughly half (51%) of the students disagreed that adding friends to their Instant Messaging account would make them more popular, only 17 percent agreed, and 32 percent did not know if this was the case.
Instrumentation The Survey of Internet Risk and Behavior was developed for this study to assess student knowledge and behavior at two schools in a northeast state. The instrument was developed using the literature and expert opinions from two current middle school leaders (not from the schools under investigation). The details of the content, format, validity, and reliability are presented in the following sections. Dimension/item content. The Survey of Internet Risk and Behavior contained thirty-three items. Following the item analysis and data reliability assessment, the findings reported in this article are based on twenty-eight of the original thirty-three items. The first seven investigate the views and experiences of the students with regard to social networking. The remaining items Response format. Students responded to each item by selecting agree, disagree, or don't know. Using a "correct" response grid, each statement received 1 point for the "appropriate" or "correct" response and 0 points for the "incorrect" or "don't know" response. Validity and reliability. Content validity of the survey items was supported through the literature (Franek 2005(Franek /2006;;McKenna 2007;Weaver 2007) and a judgmental review by five middle school teachers. Cronbach's alpha for the respective dimensions was as follows: Knowledge = .84; Bullying Behavior = .72; Internet Usage = .78. Knowledge Table 2 contains the ranked response percentages for students' knowledge of appropriate behaviors and risk of Internet predators. The "correct" or "appropriate" response percentages are boxed in the table. The behaviors associated with the boxed "disagree" percentages exceeding 60 percentage indicate positive results, since appropriate student behaviors are indicated. Of particular concern are the five items (24, 17, 20, 21, and 32) with boxed bold "agree" percentages at the top of the table. The behaviors described by these items reflect two areas of concern: knowing how easily predators can contact students and willingness to inform a parent or adult about possibly inappropriate Internet contact. Regarding contact, only 29 percent of the students felt that a predator would make contact with them based on the information they had posted online (item 24), and only 37 percent felt that it would be easy for a predator to contact them based on the contact information they put on their MySpace or Facebook page (item 17). Likewise, only 43 percent felt that it would be possible for an Internet predator to locate their home or school using Google Earth or MSN live (item 21). One would hope that students think this is the case because they have not listed specific contact information on their site. The potential to inform an adult of inappropriate contact on a site such as MySpace or Facebook is an issue of great concern. Only 40 percent of the students indicated that they would tell an adult if they were contacted on instant messenger by someone they did not know (item 20). Furthermore, only 44 percent indicated that they would tell a teacher, parent, or another adult if mean or threatening things were said about them on a site such as MySpace or Facebook (item 32). Overall, for the set of sixteen items defining the Knowledge dimension, only 59 percent of the students indicated what most educators would consider a "correct" or "appropriate" response. If we are applying any version of our usual educators' concept of mastery in the realm of knowledge, it appears that school officials and teachers have some serious areas that require discussion with our students.
Data Analysis Response percentages for the agree, disagree, and don't know options are presented for all items. For the Knowledge, Bullying Behaviors, and Internet Use dimensions, the overall percent "correct" for the set of items defining the respective dimension is also presented. Items were also ranked within each category based on the percentage of "correct" responses to identify the high and low knowledge or behavior areas. Behavior Table 3 contains the ranked response percentages for students' bullying behavior and Internet use. A somewhat positive finding is that 78 percent of the students indicate that they have not threatened or bullied another student using an instant messenger program (item 18); additionally, 83 percent indicate that they have not threatened or bullied a friend (item 22). We note that 10 The Clearing House 83(5) 2010 percent of the students did agree that they have engaged in these behaviors. While 10 percent may seem low, it raises a valid concern, since it represents 59 of the students in this study. Overall, 81 percent of the students indicated an "appropriate" response for the set of two Bullying items. Table 3 also lists the findings for three items describing the frequency of Internet use for instant messaging and accessing social networks. Less than half of the students indicated that they frequently engage in these behaviors, and overall, 43 percent responded with what many educators would consider to be an "appropriate" response.
Methodology Summary, Conclusions, and Implications for Educators Internet predator threats and cyberbullying through the use of social networking sites are major issues. Although the media presents concerns of social networking sites (usually Internet predator risks), we rarely hear of cyberbullying through these sites. While the threat of predators is a serious concern, a child is far more likely to be bullied online. Educating students on the risks they may encounter through social networking sites is paramount. As can be seen from the findings outlined in the following sections, many students do not fully understand the risks they are taking. Some of the key findings from this survey of middle school students were as follows:
Sample A total of 588 male and female students in grades 7 and 8 from an urban (n = 185) and a suburban (n = 403) school responded to the our Survey of Internet Risk and Behavior during a regularly scheduled school activity period. The urban school population was 9 percent Asian American, 7 percent African American, 11 percent Hispanic, and 73 percent Caucasian. The district where the school was located scored 40 percent in reading proficiency, 33 percent in math proficiency, and 27 percent in writing proficiency on a state standardized test. The suburban school district achieved a higher level of proficiency, reaching 74 percent in reading, 67 percent in math, and 57 percent in reading on the state standardized test. The school population was less than 1 percent American Indian, less than 1 percent Asian American, 1 percent African American, 1 percent Hispanic, and 97 percent Caucasian. Internet Predators Most students (71%) do not think that an Internet predator will contact them based on postings online. Furthermore, 63 percent do not fully understand the potential risk of Internet predators (i.e., their ability to track students on the Internet). It is clear that more education on the risk of cyber behaviors is needed. Addi-tionally, the education about students' online behaviors needs to extend to more than just the educational community. Parents and law enforcement groups are crucial players in keeping students safe from online predators. Only 40 percent of the students indicated that they would tell an adult if they were contacted by someone they did not know. The fear is, perhaps, that they would not be allowed to continue using the Internet if this were to happen. Parents need to keep a closer eye on their children's behaviors and discuss Internet dangers with them, as they would discuss any important topic. This low percentage will be shocking to anyone who is familiar with this type of research. The National Association of Secondary School Principals' publication News Leader (National Association of Secondary School Principals 2006, 9) has indicated that only 16 percent of teens and preteens affected by online bullying or predatory behavior would tell someone. The finding of 40 percent for this sample of students is more positive but still much too low and therefore quite significant.
Instrumentation The Survey of Internet Risk and Behavior was developed for this study to assess student knowledge and behavior at two schools in a northeast state. The instrument was developed using the literature and expert opinions from two current middle school leaders (not from the schools under investigation). The details of the content, format, validity, and reliability are presented in the following sections. Dimension/item content. The Survey of Internet Risk and Behavior contained thirty-three items. Following the item analysis and data reliability assessment, the findings reported in this article are based on twenty-eight of the original thirty-three items. The first seven investigate the views and experiences of the students with regard to social networking. The remaining items Response format. Students responded to each item by selecting agree, disagree, or don't know. Using a "correct" response grid, each statement received 1 point for the "appropriate" or "correct" response and 0 points for the "incorrect" or "don't know" response. Validity and reliability. Content validity of the survey items was supported through the literature (Franek 2005(Franek /2006;;McKenna 2007;Weaver 2007) and a judgmental review by five middle school teachers. Cronbach's alpha for the respective dimensions was as follows: Knowledge = .84; Bullying Behavior = .72; Internet Usage = .78. Cyberbullying Similar to the finding for the Internet predation item, only 44 percent indicated that they would tell an adult if they were the victim of cyberbullying. When asked if they had been bullied while online, 10 percent indicated yes. The 2006 NASSP publication News Leader indicated that 33 percent of all teens aged 12 to 17 years have had mean, threatening, or embarrassing things said about them online. While our findings of 10 percent may appear low in light of the national average, there is still a need for concern for this behavior. For our sample of 588 students, this percentage indicates that approximately fifty-nine of the students have been bullied by another student at home while online. Some would conclude that one is too many in this case. Shariff (2008) reports that an extreme but real consequence of this behavior could be suicidal thoughts or action. It is clear that parents need to take a more active role in the development of their child's behaviors, particularly in the digital world. Shariff states: As human beings, we teach our children how to eat, clean themselves, and communicate, and we protect and nurture them, until they are old enough to go to school. Once they are at school, we suddenly place more emphasis on supervision, discipline, authority, subordination, punishment, and consequences, with less attention to the social survival skills they will need in the contemporary world. (2008,113)
