 Results of the Interventions Two of the exercises-using signature strengths in a new way and three good things-increased happiness and decreased depressive symptoms for six months. Another exercise, the gratitude visit, caused large positive changes for one month. The two other exercises and the placebo control created positive but transient effects on happiness and depressive symptoms. Not surprisingly, the degree to which participants actively continued their assigned exercise on their own and beyond the prescribed one-week period mediated the long-term benefits. Here are more details. Using analyses of variance (ANOVAs) followed by planned contrasts, we compared the scores of participants across the following time points: pretest, immediate posttest (after doing their exercise for one week), one week after the posttest, one month after the posttest, three months after the posttest, and six months after the posttest. Figures 1 and2 show the happiness and depression scores of participants by assigned exercise. Sample sizes for each condition are shown in these figures as well as effect sizes associated with statistically significant (p Ͻ .05) contrasts for the intervention group between baseline scores and those at the different follow-ups. 2 An overall ANOVA for happiness scores (six conditions ϫ six time periods) showed significant effects for time, F(5, 2025) ϭ 26.38, p Ͻ .001, and for the Condition ϫ Time interaction, F(25, 2025) ϭ 12.38, p Ͻ .001. Similar effects were found for depression scores: a significant effect for time, F(5, 2025) ϭ 39.77, p Ͻ .001, and a significant Condition ϫ Time interaction, F(25, 2025) ϭ 5.21, p Ͻ .001. Participants in all conditions (including the placebo control condition) tended to be happier and less depressed at the immediate posttest (after doing their exercise for one week; see Figures 1 and2). One week later and at every testing 1 Older people were happier (r ϭ .18, p Ͻ .001) and less depressed (r ϭ Ϫ.17, p Ͻ .001). Gender and ethnicity were not associated with happiness or depression scores at baseline or at any of the follow-up assessments. In our analyses, we initially controlled for age, but the results were unaffected, so we present only the unadjusted means. 2 A closer look with ANOVAs at the individual interventions compared with the placebo condition revealed the following effects. With respect to happiness, there were main effects of time for gratitude visit, F(5, 750) ϭ 39.13, p Ͻ .001, three good things, F(5, 645) ϭ 8.76, p Ͻ .001, you at your best, F(5, 690) ϭ 26.77, p Ͻ .001, using signature strengths in a new way, F(5, 680) ϭ 8.56, p Ͻ .001, and identifying signature strengths, F(5, 690) ϭ 24.94, p Ͻ .001, and there was a Condition ϫ Time interaction for gratitude visit, F(5, 750) ϭ 6.88, p Ͻ .001, three good things, F(5, 645) ϭ 16.47, p Ͻ .001, and using signature strengths in a new way, F(5, 680) ϭ 17.91, p Ͻ .001, but not for you at your best, F(5, 690) ϭ 1.75, ns, or identifying signature strengths, F(5, 690) ϭ 0.35, ns. With respect to depressive symptoms, there were main effects of time for gratitude visit, F(5, 750) ϭ 20.91, p Ͻ .001, three good things, F(5, 645) ϭ 14.43, p Ͻ .001, you at your best, F(5, 690) ϭ 10.37, p Ͻ .001, using signature strengths in a new way, F(5, 680) ϭ 13.35, p Ͻ .001, and identifying signature strengths, F(5, 690) ϭ 6.59, p Ͻ .001, and there was a Condition ϫ Time interaction for gratitude visit, F(5, 750) ϭ 4.62, p Ͻ .001, three good things, F(5, 645) ϭ 5.15, p Ͻ .001, you at your best, F(5, 690) ϭ 2.83, p Ͻ .02, and using signature strengths in a new way, F(5, 680) ϭ 4.56, p Ͻ .001, but not for identifying signature strengths, F(5, 690) ϭ 0.20, ns. period thereafter, however, participants in the placebo control condition were no different than they had been at baseline. As Figures 1 and2 show, at the immediate posttest (after one week of doing the assigned exercise), partici-pants in the gratitude visit condition were happier and less depressed. In fact, participants in the gratitude visit condition showed the largest positive changes in the whole study. This boost in happiness and decrease in depressive symptoms were maintained at follow-up assessments one week and one month later. But by three months, participants in the gratitude visit condition were no happier or less depressed than they had been at baseline. Participants in the three good things exercise began to show beneficial effects one month following the posttest. At the one-month follow-up, participants in this exercise were happier and less depressed than they had been at baseline, and they stayed happier and less depressed at the three-month and six-month follow-ups. A similar long-term improvement occurred for participants in the using signature strengths in a new way condition. Immediate effects were less pronounced than for the three good things condition, but at the one-month follow-up and beyond, participants in this condition were happier and less depressed than they had been at baseline. In contrast, participants in the truncated identifying signature strengths condition showed an effect only at the immediate posttest but not thereafter. Likewise, participants in the you at your best condition showed an effect only at the immediate posttest. What caused the long-term benefits? Regardless of their assigned exercise, participants were asked explicitly to perform it for only one week. When we contacted participants for one-week, one-month, three-month, and six-month follow-ups, we asked them whether they had indeed continued the exercise for more than one week on their own. We hypothesized that continued practice of an intervention would mediate positive outcomes at followup. To test this hypothesis, we conducted ANOVAs with reported adherence to the exercise and continuing the exercise as the independent variables and with the happiness score as the dependent variable. We performed analogous ANOVAs with the depression (CES-D) score as the dependent variable. The results were straightforward. There was a significant effect for adherence to the exercise on happiness scores at all time periods and a significant effect for adherence to the exercise on depression scores at the 1-month follow-up. The interaction between continuing the exercise and adherence to the exercise was significant for happiness scores, indicating that participants who continued the exercises were the happiest. This interaction was also significant when the CES-D score was the dependent variable, indicating-again-that the long-term effects of the effective exercises (see Figure 2) were most pronounced for those who continued the exercises on their own.
 The Future of Positive Interventions We found specific interventions that make people lastingly happier, and we believe this study holds implicationssmall and large-for the future of positive interventions and perhaps for clinical interventions. We operationalized and compared five happiness interventions to a placebo control in a sizable random-assignment experiment, and found that two interventions-writing about three good things that happened each day and why they happened, and using signature strengths of character in a new way-made people happier (and less depressed) up to six months later. One other intervention-the gratitude visit-produced large positive changes but only for one month. Six months is far from "happily ever after," but our results suggest that lasting increased happiness might be possible even outside fairy tales. Effect sizes were "moderate" or larger, which is at odds with the widespread belief that the pursuit of happiness is futile because of inevitable adaptation or an immutable hedonic set point. Participants in our study were asked to perform their assigned exercise for one week and then to return to the Web site periodically for follow-up assessments. Regardless of their assigned exercise, participants-even those in the control group-were on average happier and less depressed at the immediate posttest. This pattern highlights the crucial importance of a longitudinal, placebo-controlled design in research of this nature, particularly with participants who expect to be made happier. As these studies continue and more exercises are explored, more and more inert exercises will be found, and these inert exercises can serve as placebo controls even though they were intended as active enhancers of well-being. Parametric variation can also serve the control group function, yielding "doseresponse" curves for increasing intensity or duration of the exercise. Pioneers in this field (e.g., Fordyce, 1977Fordyce,, 1983) ) found that happiness levels could be increased by "shotgun" interventions involving multiple exercises. Identifying specific ingredients is an uncommon early move in the testing of interventions, and our studies go beyond such demonstrations, although further work is of course needed to identify the fine detail of how our interventions worked. We also recommend the random-assignment placebo control. It may be that the mere act of doing something assigned by a professional in the expectation of gain in the form of a boost in happiness is sufficient to lift one's spirits in the short term (Frank, 1973). This may be particularly true of our sample, composed as it is of people who want to become happier, who are invested in the outcome, and who think www.authentichappiness.org is a plausible authority. Baseline CES-D scores indicated that our participants were, on average, mildly depressed. Our participants were probably motivated to try things to feel better, and most did-at least temporarily. Hence the importance of placebo controls. By one week following the intervention, participants in the placebo control group (the early memories exercise) had returned to their baseline levels of happiness and depression symptoms, and there they remained through the 6-month follow-up. Those participants who were asked to write a story about themselves at their best-the you at your best exercise-demonstrated the same pattern as the placebo participants: an immediate boost in happiness after a week of doing the exercise and an immediate reduction in depressive symptoms as well, with neither effect lasting beyond the posttest. Therefore, we conclude that this exercise is not an effective intervention, at least not in isolation. We add "in isolation" because in our multiexercise programs (which have not yet been subjected to an RCT), we use this exercise to introduce the signature strengths interventions, and it is possible that telling an introductory story about one's highest strengths, followed by the effective signature strength exercise, may amplify the benefits on happiness and depression. It seems plausible-given that three of the interventions were effective when delivered alone-to suppose that a package of positive interventions, perhaps including ones that were ineffective in iso-lation, might well exceed the beneficial effects of any single exercise. Such packages-likely containing some moves that are truly inert, some moves that are inert in isolation but effective in a package, and some moves that are always active-are what any therapy consists of. We have designed and are testing such packages. Further, these single exercises were delivered with "no human hands," that is, electronically on a Web site. Discussions of therapeutic effects often emphasize the power of the relationship with the therapist; only when that relationship is in place do specific interventions work. The finding of beneficial effects with no human therapeutic alliance suggests the operation of powerful specific ingredients in the exercises. We believe that in the hands of a skilled clinician or coach, even more beneficial effects might occur. Our ongoing studies of packages of exercises delivered with human hands find large effect sizes for relieving depression and increasing happiness, in contrast to the mostly moderate effect sizes reported here. We asked participants to do their assigned exercise for only one week. We did not suggest that they should keep it up thereafter. In retrospect, we believe that one week may not be enough time for participants in the using signature strengths in a new way condition and the three good things condition to develop sufficient skills and experience. Yet participants in both of these conditions proceeded to benefit from these exercises up to six months later. We found that the participants who continued to benefit from the exercises were those people who spontaneously did them beyond the required one-week period, without our instruction to do so. We believe that these two interventions involve skills that improve with practice, that are fun, and that thus are self-maintaining. Unlike many therapeutic outcomes, such as weight loss from dieting, these exercises are self-reinforcing. The majority of participants in these conditions answered "yes" to a question about whether they were continuing the exercise on their own. As we continue to develop and test exercises, we will pay particular attention to the ease with which the exercise can be integrated into an individual's daily schedule and to the processes of self-maintenance. It may not be practical for individuals to schedule a formal gratitude visit on a regular basis, but most people can make time every day to express their appreciation for someone-elaborately and sincerely. In any package of positive interventions, it may be optimal to intersperse exercises that make an immediate impact (e.g., the gratitude visit) with those exercises that are easily integrated into the daily routine. An important question left unanswered by the current study is whether more is better when it comes to happiness interventions. Given that the using signature strengths in a new way exercise, the three good things exercise, and the gratitude visit exercise were all effective, does it make sense to assign them all to a person who wishes to be happier? And if so, is there an optimal sequence? Is there a personality type for whom some exercises "take" and others do not? We are currently testing the number of exercises both parametrically and in different sequences in an attempt to bolster their effects on happiness and depression. Measurement of positive states needs more research. Many happiness researchers subscribe to the notion that happiness is necessarily subjective and is essentially whatever the individual defines it to be (e.g., Lyubomirsky, Sheldon, & Schkade, in press). If happiness is in the eye of the beholder, then self-report measures are the only appropriate measures. We do not think that this approach is solid enough: Even though individuals may be the best judge of how happy they are at the moment, they may not be accurate historians with respect to when and in what types of situations they were happy in the past. One challenge for researchers is to develop better behavior-based, domainspecific assessment tools. We suspect that productivity at work and physical health follow the same patterns as subjective happiness, and we will welcome the day when objective productivity and health measures supplement subjective happiness measures. Although our study is the most ambitious randomassignment, placebo-controlled test of happiness interventions we know, our interventions were documented only on a convenience sample. This population was largely welleducated, White, and financially comfortable. Furthermore, they were mildly depressed and motivated to become happier. Future research on the efficacy of these exercises for individuals who are either much happier or much more depressed than our current population and who come from other backgrounds may uncover limits on the generality of positive interventions. We are currently asking this question in collaboration with disability counselors whose primary task is to help individuals with disabilities achieve high-quality employment and a high quality of life. We cannot resist the speculation that happiness exercises may prove therapeutic in depressive disorders. It is important to note that these interventions also reduced depressive symptoms lastingly, and in other studies we are finding that this effect is massive. Typically in the therapeutic endeavor, we tackle disorders head-on: We teach anxious people to relax, depressed people to argue against depressing thoughts, people with conflict to gain insight into the sources of conflict, and people with obsessivecompulsive disorders to find out that disasters do not ensue if they do not perform their rituals. In fact, an unspoken premise of all talk therapy is that it is beneficial to talk about one's troubles and to overcome them by confronting them. We see positive interventions as a supplement to therapy focused on troubles, another arrow in the quiver of the therapist. Psychotherapy as defined now is where you go to talk about your troubles and your weaknesses; perhaps in the future it will also be where you go to build your strengths. Perhaps on the 10th anniversary of the millennial issue of the American Psychologist, we will be able to review such developments. At least since the time of Aristotle, scholars, philosophers, and religious leaders have pondered the question "How can we become lastingly happier?" Yet until recently, the only guiding question in clinical psychology and psychiatry has been "How can we reduce suffering?" We believe that psychology and psychiatry have found some answers to the suffering question and that this is a fine beginning. But even if this question is answered fully, the mission of psychology should not end there. Few people are wholly content just with being less depressed and less anxious and less angry. Psychotherapy has long been where you go to talk about your troubles, a strangely untested assumption. We suggest that psychotherapy of the future may also be where you go to talk about your strengths.
