Participants
Act and the Protection of Pupil Rights Amendment, were approved by the IRB of This study targeted adolescents aged 13 through 19 years, enrolled in nineth the New York State Psychiatric Institute/Columbia University Department of Psychiatry. through twelfth grade in six high schools in Nassau, Suffolk, and Westchester counties in New York State.
Five schools were public co-Measures educational schools and one was a parochial all-boys school.
These schools were part of a A self-report questionnaire assessed depression, suicidal ideation, suicide attempts, study examining whether asking about suicidality during a screening program creates and peer victimization.
The assessment time frame was the past 4 weeks, with the excep-distress or increases suicidal ideation (Gould et al., 2005)  Green, & Carlson, 1981;Teri, 1982).
Each response ranged from 0 (symptoms not present)
for Children (DISC-IV; Shaffer, Fisher, Lucas, Dulcan, & Schwab-Stone, 2000) and an to 3 (symptom is severe), with a maximum total score of 60.
A cut-off point of 16 was em-earlier suicide screen (Shaffer et al., 2004).
These items have demonstrated good con-ployed to dichotomize BDI scores.
This cutoff has correctly classified 81% of adolescent struct validity (Gould et al., 1998;Shaffer et al., 2004).
The assessment of an attempt in-psychiatric patients with major depressive disorder (Strober et al., 1981) and has been cluded questions about occurrences, injuries sustained, medical care sought, and hospital-recommended to detect possible depression in normal populations (Beck & Steer, 1993).
ization (Meehan, Lamb, Saltzman, & O'Carroll, 1992).
The adolescent was considered to The internal consistency reliability (as measured by Cronbach's alpha) of the BDI-IA is have a history of an attempt if he or she reported any past attempt, regardless of timing, .89 (Beck, Steer, Ball, & Ranieri, 1996).
Suicidal Ideation.
The Suicide Ide-injury, or medical attention.
Specific Types of Peer Victimization. ation Questionnaire (SIQ-JR) assesses suicidal thoughts and is designed for large-scale, Several questions regarding victimization were derived from the WHO study on youth school-based screening of adolescents (Reynolds, 1988).
The 15-item SIQ-JR uses a 7-health (Nansel et al., 2001).
Questions about victimization were preceded with the follow-point Likert-type scale, ranging from 0 (I never had this thought) to 6 (This thought was ing explanation.
"We say a student is being bullied when another student or group of in my mind almost every day), assessing the frequency of specific suicidal thoughts during students says or does nasty and unpleasant things to him or her.
It is also bullying when the past month.
It assesses thoughts related to death and dying, passive and active suicidal a pupil is teased repeatedly in a way he or she doesn't like.
But it is not bullying when two ideation, and suicidal intent.
Reliability of the SIQ-JR is high, ranging from .91 to .96 students of about the same strength quarrel or fight."
Victimization was assessed by six (Keane, Dick, Bechtold, & Manson, 1996;Reynolds, 1988;Reynolds & Mazza, 1999) questions asking respondents to report the frequency with which they were victimized in for internal consistency and from .87 to .93 for test-retest reliability (Reynolds & Mazza, different ways.
The different types of victimization assessed were: "Made fun of you be-1999).
The SIQ-JR has demonstrated criterion validity (King et al., 1993;Reynolds, cause of your religion or race"; "Made fun of you because of your looks or speech"; "Hit, 1988"Hit, , 1990;;Reynolds & Mazza, 1999), construct validity in clinical samples (King, Gha-slapped, or punched you"; "Spread rumors or mean lies about you"; "Made sexual jokes, ziuddin, McGovern, Brand, Hill, & Naylor, 1996;King, Hill, Naylor, Evans, & Shain, comments, or gestures to you"; "Used e-mail or Internet to be mean to you."
The fre-1993; King, Katz, Ghaziuddin, Brand, Hill, & McGovern, 1997;Sibthorpe, Drinkwater, quency items were coded on a 5-point scale ranging from not at all to most days.
Respon-Gardner, & Bammer, 1995;Siemen, Warrington, & Mangano, 1994), and predictive dents were classified as never victimized, victimized less than weekly, or victimized fre-validity (Keane et al., 1996).
Suicidal ideation was considered serious if the adolescent quently (at least 3 to 4 times in the past 4 weeks). scored 31 or higher on the SIQ-JR; or scored 5 or 6 on two or more of the six "critical" SIQ-JR items (Reynolds, 1988); or re-Statistical Analysis sponded with either of the two most serious response options of the BDI suicide item.
Chi-square analyses were conducted to examine gender differences in the prevalence Suicide Attempt History.
Seven questions asking about lifetime and recent suicide of specific types of peer victimization.
A se-
