| MATERIALS AND METHODS The trial was conducted in accordance with the CONSORT (Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials) guidelines and its adaptation for Internet-based interventions. 22 | RESULTS
| Trial design This was a parallel-group, pragmatic RCT that aimed to evaluate the effects of a novel Internet intervention for PwE, offered adjunctively to CAU. The outcome time point of primary interest was 3 months, and the CAU group was permitted to use the intervention after this time point. Online assessments were also conducted for both groups at 6 and 9 months postrandomization to examine the stability of symptom course and potential improvements beyond the 3-month time point. | Description of trial participants Demographic and clinical characteristics are presented in Table 1. The mean PHQ-9 for the total sample at baseline was 15.01 (SD = 3.18), indicating moderate to moderately severe depression. There were no baseline group differences in demographic or clinical characteristics, indicating successful randomization (Table 1 in Appendix S1).
| Trial setting and patient recruitment PwE were recruited consecutively via outpatient clinics in epilepsy centers and other hospitals as well as Internet forums, social media (eg, Facebook), and health insurance brochures. PwE were invited to indicate their interest by entering their name and e-mail address at an online study website and were then contacted by a member of the research team with an invitation to complete the baseline online assessment. If the online assessment indicated a preliminary match with inclusion criteria, they were contacted for a telephone interview, which included a diagnostic interview. Participants were recruited between July 2016 and May 2017. | Intervention delivery and usage, and participant retention A total of 200 participants were randomized (Figure 1). Most participants (52.0%) reported having learned about the study via an Internet forum or Facebook post. Other entry points included the following: information provided by a clinic or hospital (14.5%), recommendation by a doctor or therapist (5.5%), flyer or newsletter (8.5%), informed by friends (8.5%), or "other" sources (2.0%). Of the randomized participants, 154 (77.0%) completed primary outcome measures at 3 months; the dropout rate was, therefore, 23.0%. With respect to demographic variables, only gender was associated with a higher dropout risk, as 31.5% of men but only 19.7% of women dropped out by month 3, χ 2 (1) = 3.55, P = 0.06. Of the 100 participants randomized to the intervention, 18 were excluded from the PP analysis because they did not register to use the intervention. Among the 82 participants who registered, mean usage duration over the first 3 months was 355.06 minutes (SD = 357.59). Average session duration was 25.84 minutes (SD = 13.91).
| Randomization and blinding Randomization was performed by the principal investigator (PI; Y.N.) using a computer-generated sequence to generate the allocation sequence. The PI did not have knowledge of participant characteristics prior to performing the randomization, because participants were enrolled by trained research associates. Thus, concealed allocation was ensured. Participants were not blinded with regard to whether they were receiving the intervention. | Adverse events, and negative and positive reported consequences Negative or positive effects were assessed with the INEP-ON among the 135 participants who used the intervention immediately (intervention group) or after a 3-month delay (control group). Items cover content such as improvements or deterioration in relationships, a sense of dependency on the program, and emerging suicidal thoughts. Of the 135 intervention users, 74 reported at least one positive or negative effect. Sixteen of these 135 participants never registered to activate the program but nevertheless reported effects due to the intervention; their responses were therefore excluded. Across the 10 items that measure positive or negative intervention effects, six participants (4.44%) reported at least one negative effect, whereas 73 (54.07%) reported at least one positive effect. The most common negative effect was reduced psychotherapy motivation (2.96%). However, 26.67% reported feeling more motivated to start psychotherapy after using Emyna. Additional positive effects attributed to Emyna included improvements in thinking/reasoning (47.41%), reduced rumination (31.11%), improved well-being (30.37%), and reduced loneliness (28.89%). Across the 13 items that measure only negative intervention effects, 51 participants (37.78%) reported at least one mild (n = 44), moderate (n = 10), or severe (n = 2) effect. The two participants who reported severe negative effects expressed feeling worried about data protection or feeling pressured by the program to comply with therapeutic exercises. No participant reported increased drug use or emerging suicidality due to Emyna (see Figure 1 in Appendix S1).
| Intervention The intervention (termed Emyna) is described in the trial protocol; further details are provided in the online Appendix S1. 21 The intervention name "Emyna" was inspired by the Greek word "amyna," which in English denotes "defense," alluding to the idea that the program might help PwE to defend themselves against some of the adverse emotional effects wrought by epilepsy. In brief, Emyna is a fully automatic Internet intervention that requires no clinician support. It conveys CBT techniques and exercises to PwE and can be accessed over a period of 180 days. We expected that reduction of depressive symptoms should be evident by 3 months, based on previous findings. 19 Program content is presented in interactive "simulated dialogues" in which patients navigate through the program by reading brief text passages or listening to audio recordings and then selecting one of several response options. The intervention can be accessed via a secure, password-protected website on any computer or smartphone with an Internet connection. | Study outcomes
| Measures Baseline data as well as 3-, 6-, and 9-month data were collected via a secure, encrypted online survey service, and participants were invited via e-mail to complete the assessments. Participants who did not respond were contacted with brief reminders up to five times. | Primary outcome: depression The ITT analysis showed significant effects of the intervention on depression at 3 months, on both the PHQ-9 and the NDDIE (Cohen d = 0.54 and 0.51, respectively; Table 2 and Figure 2). Participants in the control group also experienced depression reduction, but improvement rates were exceeded significantly by participants in the intervention group. These effects were confirmed and slightly larger in PP analyses (Table 3). Clinically significant improvement was observed in 29% of intervention group participants compared to 15% in the control group, χ 2 (1) = 5.71, P = 0.02. At month 3, 8% of intervention group participants scored in the no or minimal depression range (0-4), 40% in the mild range (5-9), 37% in the moderate range (10-14), and 15% in the severe range (≥15). Among control group participants, 2% scored in the no or minimal range, 19% mild, 42% moderate, and 37% severe. These proportions differed significantly, χ 2 (3) = 20.70, P < 0.001. There were no group differences in depression severity category at baseline; overall, 47% scored in the moderate range and 53% in the severe range, χ 2 (1) = 0.72, P = 0.40. Applying the Jacobson and Truax 30 methods to estimate clinical significance, recovery criteria were achieved by 25% of intervention versus 11% of control group participants, reliable improvement without fulfilling recovery criteria was achieved by 8% of participants in both groups, no reliable change occurred in 66% of intervention versus 79% of control group participants, and deterioration was observed in 1% of intervention versus 2% of control group participants. Further details on these analyses are provided in Appendix S1.
| Primary outcome Outcome measures are described in detail in the trial protocol. 21 The primary outcome was depressive symptom severity, assessed at the before and after time points with two self-report measures: (1) the PHQ-9 and (2) the Neurological Disorders Depression Inventory for Epilepsy (NDDIE). Whereas the PHQ-9 is a generic self-report measure of depression symptoms, the NDDIE was developed specifically for PwE. | Secondary outcomes Significant intervention effects were observed on all outcome measures at 3 months (Table 2, Figure 2). Intervention group participants reported greater improvements in anxiety, stress, and depressive symptoms, social-occupational impairment, and epilepsy-related quality of life. All effects were significant in ITT and PP analyses (Tables 2 and3). Whereas ITT analyses yielded medium effect sizes, PP effect sizes were slightly larger. Effects on quality of life were slightly smaller than those observed for symptom changes.
| Sample size An a priori power analysis showed that a sample size of N = 200 would be required to attain 80% power to detect an anticipated effect size of d = 0.5 on the PHQ-9 at month 3, even if attrition was as much as 30%, as in a similar previous trial. 18 | Stability of effects Observed means at all assessment points are presented in Table 2 in Appendix S1. At month 3, intervention group participants differed on all but one measure from control group participants, P < 0.05. The exception was that a P value of 0.06 was observed at 3 months for the QOLIE-10. However, the ANCOVA, which takes baseline group differences into account, showed significant intervention effects for the QOLIE-10 at 3 months in both ITT and PP analyses. The group differences at month 6 tended to be smaller than those at month 3 and, as expected, were not significant with the adjusted P value of 0.01. At month 9, there were no group differences. Control group participants experienced improvements on most measures from baseline to month 3 as well as month 3 to month 6 (they were permitted to access the intervention after month 3), but no further changes from month 6 to month 9. Intervention group participants reported substantial improvements on all measures between baseline and month 3. Improvements thereafter attained significance on two occasions (PHQ-9 from month 6 to month 9 and WSAS from month 3 to month 6; see Table 3 in Appendix S1).
| Statistical analyses All outcomes were analyzed according to the intention-totreat (ITT) principle. Per-protocol (PP) analyses included data only from intervention group participants who had registered to use the intervention. Missing data were imputed for ITT and PP analyses at the primary endpoint of 3 months with multiple imputation (100 imputations, 50 iterations) based on sociodemographic data and available outcomes, following current methodological recommendations. 27 The 100 imputation datasets were merged into one pooled dataset. Given that two time points were examined (baseline, 3 months), analyses of covariance (ANCOVA) were used, which are recommended for trials with before and after measurements. 28 In ITT and PP analyses, we examined the effects of group (intervention vs control) while controlling for the baseline levels of each respective variable. To examine the stability of effects, we examined observed means at all time points with t tests. To reduce familywise error due to multiple testing, we applied a P value of 0.01 for these analyses (two-sided). The groups were not expected to differ in outcomes at 6 and 9 months, because control group participants could access the intervention after 3 months. For the primary outcome measure (PHQ-9), we examined clinical significance following established algorithms. 29 Specifically, participants who improved by at least five points between baseline and 3 months and scored below 10 at 3 months were classified as clinically significantly improved. For descriptive purposes, we also computed the proportion of participants whose PHQ-9 scores at 3 months indicated minimal or no (0-4), mild (5-9), moderate (10-14), or severe (≥15) symptoms, and we applied the clinical significance approach of Jacobson and Truax. 30 | Dose-response relationships We examined correlations between usage intensity (minutes engaged with the intervention) and baseline to month 3 PHQ-9 change. However, usage intensity did not correlate with depression reduction as measured either by point reduction or percentage reduction, p > 0.43.
| MATERIALS AND METHODS The trial was conducted in accordance with the CONSORT (Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials) guidelines and its adaptation for Internet-based interventions. 22 | Subsidiary analyses At posttreatment, participants in the intervention group reported fewer hospitalization days in the preceding 3 months (mean = 1.67, SD = 4.75) than control group participants (mean = 3.88, SD = 7.37), t 151 = 2.18, P = 0.031, whereas there was no difference in the 3 months prior to study entry (t 198 = 0.35, P = 0.73). Similarly, at posttreatment, intervention participants reported fewer sick days over the previous 3 months (mean = 8.56, SD = 18.31) than control group participants (mean = 16.02, SD = 25.28), t 151 = 2.07, P = 0.040, whereas there was no difference at baseline (t 198 = 0.99, P = 0.32). Seizure frequency did not differ between groups at baseline or 3 months (see Table 1), χ 2 (3) = 1.21, P = 0.75. Additional analyses explored whether concurrent depression treatment might account for observed effects. At 3 months, 19.4% of intervention group participants and 30.9% of control group participants reported being in psychotherapy, which was not a significant difference, χ 2 (1) = 2.62, P = 0.11. Moreover, 29.2% of intervention group participants and 29.6% of control group participants reported taking antidepressant medication at posttreatment, which was not significantly different, χ 2 (1) = 0.0039, P = 0.95. We also examined whether psychotherapy or antidepressant use moderated intervention effects. Factorial analyses of variance with group and treatment status as independent variables and PHQ-9 change (baseline to 3 months) as dependent variable did not yield significant effects for the interactions between treatment modality and group (intervention, control), P > 0.25. Thus, symptom reduction rates were not differentially affected by concurrent depression treatment.
| Trial design This was a parallel-group, pragmatic RCT that aimed to evaluate the effects of a novel Internet intervention for PwE, offered adjunctively to CAU. The outcome time point of primary interest was 3 months, and the CAU group was permitted to use the intervention after this time point. Online assessments were also conducted for both groups at 6 and 9 months postrandomization to examine the stability of symptom course and potential improvements beyond the 3-month time point. T A B L E 2
| Trial setting and patient recruitment PwE were recruited consecutively via outpatient clinics in epilepsy centers and other hospitals as well as Internet forums, social media (eg, Facebook), and health insurance brochures. PwE were invited to indicate their interest by entering their name and e-mail address at an online study website and were then contacted by a member of the research team with an invitation to complete the baseline online assessment. If the online assessment indicated a preliminary match with inclusion criteria, they were contacted for a telephone interview, which included a diagnostic interview. Participants were recruited between July 2016 and May 2017. | User satisfaction Detailed analyses of treatment satisfaction are provided in Table 4 in Appendix S1. In brief, most participants (82.26%) were satisfied with the program; 16.13% were slightly dissatisfied, and 1.61% were very dissatisfied. Similarly, 85.25% judged intervention quality as good (59.02%) or excellent (26.23%), and none appraised it as poor. No participant reported feeling worse after using the intervention. Satisfaction ratings correlated moderately with usage intensity (average correlation between usage and the 10 items presented in Table 4 in Appendix S1: r = 0.32). As expected, participants who were more satisfied tended to use the intervention for longer durations.
