Methods Results
Study design The @ktiv trial is a parallel group, cluster randomized controlled trial in the primary care setting with general practices serving as clustering variable. General practitioners from registered practices in three German federal states (Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt, and Thuringia) were invited to take part in the study. Assessments in both the intervention group (IG) and the control group (CG) took place at baseline, after six weeks and after six months. Patient flow Of the 4840 general practices that were contacted, 190 practitioners provided written informed consent and were randomized to either IG (N = 95) or CG (N = 95) (Fig. 1). Of those, a total of N = 112 practices recruited patients for the study (IG (N = 65) and CG (N = 47). The median number of recruited patients was three (IQR 1-6). Recruitment of patients took place from February 1, 2014 to August 31, 2015. GPs recruited a final total of 647 patients for the @ktiv trial, in almost equal parts from treatment (n = 320) and control practices (n = 327). Of those, information had been gathered for 564 participants (87%) at six weeks and for 509 participants (79%) at six months follow-up. Sensitivity analysis for the randomization showed that there was no statistical difference between IG and CG practices with regard to the practitioner's gender, age, qualification, treatment experience, and experience with cCBT. Further, there were no significant differences in either group between practitioners who had recruited patients into the trial and those who had been randomized but had not recruited patients. The only exception to the latter was the physician's age; nonrecruiting practitioners were three years older on average.
Recruitment All participating GPs were fully informed about the purpose and procedures of the study and gave their written informed consent before being sequentially allocated to either IG or CG. GPs were provided with test logins for the intervention. In addition, they received written and oral information with regard to the content of the intervention and how to introduce the intervention to their patients by means of an information flyer. GPs informed eligible patients about the study and asked them to take part. The patient sample was comprised of adults (≥ 18 years), being diagnosed with a mild or moderate first or recurrent depressive episode according to ICD-10 (F32.0, F32.1, F33.0, F33.1) and screening positive for mild to moderately severe depressive symptoms according to the nine item Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9 score range: 5-19 points) (Löwe et al., 2004). Other inclusion criteria were German as first language, Internet access and use. Patients were excluded if any of the following criteria was present: severe or persistent depressive disorder F32.3,F33.2,F33.3,F34), organic mental disorders (ICD-10: F00-F09), alcohol or drug dependence (F10-F16, F18, F19), schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorders (F20-F29), bipolar disorders (F31), suicidality, fatal somatic disease (e.g., final stadium of cancer), current grief (due to loss of a beloved person in the recent past), and/or receiving psychotherapy at the time of recruitment. All patients gave written informed consent. Practices that consented to participate were sequentially randomized into one of the two conditions by using a computerized random number generator (allocation ratio 1:1). After randomization practitioners were informed about their condition. The principle investigators and statistician were blinded to the treatment allocation. Given that it is not possible to blind a participant when applying an eHealth intervention (Baker et al., 2010), it was not feasible to blind participants about the intervention they received. Study participants were asked to complete the baseline assessment at the time of recruitment visit before leaving the practice. Follow-up data were collected via postal questionnaires. Three postal reminders were sent in order to increase the proportion of returned patient questionnaires for each assessment point and to avoid a potential dropout (Dillman, 2013). All participants received a monetary incentive of 20 Euros for their participation regardless of the degree to which they participated; GPs received 80 Euros per recruited patient for the additional time and effort involved in the recruitment process. Baseline characteristics More than two thirds (69%) of participants were female; the mean age was 43.9 years (SD = 13.7; Table 1). Participants were in equal parts married and unmarried, the majority was living with a partner, working full-time, had a medium level of education, and had completed an apprenticeship. Two out of three participants further reported that they have been treated for psychological problems before, and 71% had depression diagnosis in the past. Symptoms of a comorbid anxiety disorder were present in 41% of participants, with symptoms of PD (27%) more prevalent than GAD (23%). The randomized groups were reasonably balanced at baseline in terms of gender, marital status, domicile, vocational qualification, and treatment history for psychological problems. IG participants tended to be younger and were more likely to be employed full-time and less likely retired. In addition, half of the IG participants reported current symptoms of an anxiety disorder, whereas one-third of the CG did. Observed mean scores for the primary and secondary outcomes by treatment group are displayed in Table 2. IG participants had higher baseline scores compared to the CG with regard to the BDI-II and the PHQ-9. There was no evidence of an uneven distribution in EPAS and EQ-5D-5L scores at baseline. Depression scores (BDI-II, PHQ-9) decreased in both groups over time, whereas self-efficacy (EPAS) and quality of life (EQ-5D-5L) increased during the six month observation period. Changes were consistently larger in the IG as compared to the CG.
Interventions Intention-to-treat analysis
Intervention group Participants in the intervention practices received usual care plus information about and access to the German version of the self-guided cCBT program moodgym (cCBT + TAU). Moodgym is an internet-based, self-management program designed to prevent and alleviate symptoms of depression. It was developed and has been evaluated by the Centre for Mental Health Research (CMHR) of the Australian National University (ANU) (Christensen et al., 2004;Mackinnon et al., 2008;Hickie et al., 2010). The program consists of five interactive modules which are delivered in a specific order: feelings, thoughts, unwarping, destressing, and relationships. Modules include information, animated demonstrations, quizzes and "homework" exercises. Behavioral change is induced by using several cognitive behavioral therapy techniques, such as learning how to identify and challenge negative thought patterns, increasing social and physical activity or inducing problem solving skills. The German version of moodgym was developed by different specialists in mental health care including psychotherapists and psychiatrists at ISAP. Adaptions during the translation process were included to account for German cultural norms. During the trial, German moodgym (version III) was exclusively available for study participants in the intervention group. In Germany, moodgym became available online as a free-of-charge cCBT program in 2016 and was updated to version IV in 2017. The development and delivery of moodgym is now undertaken by e-hub Health Pty Ltd, which is a spin-off company of the Australian National University (ANU). The German version of the program is hosted at a German server and data are completely stored in Germany. During the recruitment visit, GPs gave participants a sealed envelope with all relevant study information and a personal login to the moodgym website. Two weeks after, IG participants received a postal reminder for logging in to the program. Moodgym was implemented in the @ktiv trial as self-management cCBT. GPs supported the use by recommending it as an adjunct element of treatment. Primary outcomes Results of the ITT analysis revealed significant group differences in the mean BDI-II scores at both follow-ups (Table 3). Adjusting for baseline BDI-II score and covariates, IG participants scored on average 2.84 points (t = -3.99, p i * < .001) and 5.06 points (t = -4.44, p i * < .001) lower than controls at 6 weeks and at 6 months, respectively. The estimated size of the effect was small but higher than assumed for sample size calculations (six weeks d = 0.36; six months d = 0.41). The number needed to treat at six months was estimated at 6.2, indicating that seven patients need to be treated for one additional remission compared with the control group. BDI-II remission rates in the IG (CG) were 19.7% (13.5%) at six weeks and 39.0% (23.0%) at six months. BDI-II response rates were 23.5% (13.8%) at 6 weeks and 46.5% (22.3%) at 6 months. Adjusted mean differences in PHQ-9 scores were not significant at six weeks (Diff = -1.04, t = -1.94, p i * = .21), but at six months the decrease was significantly larger in the IG than in the CG (Diff = -2.00, t = -2.83, p i * < .05). The between-group effect size was lower than estimated for the BDI-II (d = 0.26). PHQ-9 remission rates in the IG (CG) were 13.2% (10.0%) at six weeks and 30.8% (17.0%) at six months. PHQ-9 response rates were 22.4% (15.8%) at 6 weeks and 45.9% (24.4%) at 6 months.
Control group Participants in the control practices were treated as usual (TAU). There were no constraints on the GPs treatment as usual, which allowed e.g. medication, referral for psychotherapy or specialized psychiatric outpatient care and in-patient care, if necessary. Secondary outcomes Analyses of the secondary outcomes revealed statistical evidence of a difference in EQ-5D-5L scores between the IG and the CG at six weeks (t = 2.43, p < .05) and at six months (t = 2.38, p < .05). Results additionally yielded evidence of an effect in favor of the IG for the EPAS at six months (t = 4.06, p < .001). Estimated between group effect sizes for the secondary outcomes were small (0.12 < d < 0.36). At six months, moodgym was more effective in improving self-efficacy (NNT = 6.4) and less effective in improving quality of life (NNT = 12.5).
Outcomes Per protocol analysis Results of the PP analyses involving data on all IG participants who had accessed the program at least once during study follow-up (n = 224) revealed highly similar results as compared to the ITT analysis (Table 4). Again, adjusting for baseline score and covariates, estimates from the mixed models indicated a significant treatment effect for the BDI-II both at six weeks (t = -3.65, p i * < .001) and six months (t = -4.48, p i * < .001) and for the PHQ-9 at six months (t = -2.95, p i * < .05).
Primary outcomes Self-reported severity of depression, measured by the German-language versions of the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II; Hautzinger et al., 2009) and the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) at six weeks and six months, served as primary outcomes. Analysis of TAU Self-report data on medication and service utilization during followup revealed that participants in both IG and CG received a range of treatments as part of TAU. Within the period of six months after baseline 88% of IG (190/217) and 78% of CG participants (CG 216/ 278) received some kind of treatment due to psychological distress. Overall, 38% of IG patients (83/218) and 27% (75/283) of CG patients reported psychotherapy contact. Further, 52% of IG participants (114/ 218) and 59% of CG participants (166/283) indicated the intake of medication due to psychological distress. In addition, IG and CG patients showed the same proportions regarding the utilization of "alternative treatments" (e.g. homeopathic practitioners; CG 17/283; 6% and IG 14/218; 6%) and local self-help groups (CG 7/283; 2% and IG 4/ 218; 2%). Linking the trial data to claims data will be part of a health economic analysis which is still pending.
Secondary outcomes Self-efficacy and health-related quality of life were assessed as secondary outcomes at six weeks and six months. The former was measured with the six-item Hope and Self-efficacy subscale from the questionnaire for the assessment of empowerment in patients with affective and schizophrenic disorders (EPAS; Kilian et al., 2012). For the latter, we calculated a sum score of the items of the five-level version of the health state classifier EQ-5D of the EuroQol Group (EQ-5D-5L; Hinz et al., 2014). Uptake Log-in data regarding the uptake of the intervention revealed that 224 (70%) out of 320 participants who were allocated to IG accessed moodgym during the observation period. Higher educated individuals (OR = 3.7, p < .01) and those reporting symptoms of an anxiety disorder at baseline (OR = 2.2, p < .01) were more likely to access the program at least once during the six months follow-up. No statistical differences were found for gender, marital status and age.
Other measures Sociodemographic information on gender, age, marital status, and domicile was collected to control for potential confounding variables. We further considered education, vocational qualification, and employment status of the participants. Treatment history for psychological problems including depression, and the existence of a comorbid anxiety disorder (Löwe et al., 2002) were also assessed. The latter was used to screen for symptoms of a comorbid panic disorder (PD) and/or generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) according to ICD-10 criteria. The questionnaire also included items on medication use (yes vs. no) and service utilization (yes vs. no) during follow-up. With regard to the use of moodgym, pseudonymised data regarding uptake and adherence rates were obtained from computer log files. Uptake was defined as accessing the program (yes vs. no). Adherence was determined as level of activity within the program and was categorized into (i) no completed module, (ii) one completed module, and (iii) two or more completed modules (Batterham et al., 2008). In addition, acceptability was assessed with a shortened version of the USE questionnaire (Lund, 2001), including 9 items on the perceived usefulness, ease of use and learning, and satisfaction of the program. Items form a seven-point Likert rating scale ranging from 1 (disagree) to 7 (agree). Adherence With regard to adherence, computer records showed that 26% (58/ 224) accessed but did not complete the first module. One module was completed by 33% (73/224) and two or more modules were completed by 42% (93/224) of the IG participants. A total of 13% (29/224) completed all five modules. Comparing study participants who have completed less than two modules with those having completed two or more modules revealed significant age differences: a 1-year increase in participant's age at baseline increased the odds of completing two or more modules by 7.0% (OR = 1.07, p < .001). There were no significant differences with regard to gender, education, marital status, and anxiety comorbidity.
Sample size A meta-analysis on the effectiveness of internet-based self-management programs for patients with anxiety and depressive disorders revealed pooled effect sizes of d = 0.24 (fixed-effects analysis) and d = 0.26 (mixed-effects analysis) for interventions without therapist support (Spek et al., 2007). Assuming an average a priori effect size of d = 0.25, an intracluster correlation of 4% (average cluster size 4), and an adjusted alpha level of 0.036 for testing two non-independent primary outcomes (Braun, 1994), we calculated that a total of N = 632 patients (n = 316 patients per group) would be required in order to measure an effect of the intervention on the two primary outcomes with 80% power. Assuming that recruitment would not be homogenous across practices, we aimed to recruit four to six patients within 150 practices. Acceptability Overall, IG participants had an average score of 4.7 (95% CI 4.5 to 4.8; n = 192) of 7 points on the USE questions at 6 weeks and 4.6 (95% CI 4.4 to 4.8; n = 139) points at six months, indicating slightly above moderate acceptance of moodgym. Differences in acceptance ratings with regard to gender, age, and education were marginal and not significant at either time point. Moreover, we did not find a significant change in the overall acceptance rating from six weeks to six months, adjusting for sociodemographic, educational and clinical covariates.
Missing data Inspection of baseline data revealed missing information on outcome variables and covariates. Missingness ranged from 0.1% (employment status) to 8.0% (panic disorder) and totaled to 19.6% for the overall set of baseline characteristics. Since missingness was not completely at random, complete case analysis was not appropriate. Therefore, we replaced all missing baseline data by using multiple imputation by chained equations (ice routine in Stata) with all sociodemographic, educational, and clinical variables, as well as available baseline assessments of outcome variables as predictors. Pooled estimates of 25 imputed datasets were used for all analyses. Analyses of uptake and adherence to moodgym were based on all participants who were allocated to the treatment arm. Examinations of the utilization of TAU and usability ratings refer to all participants with valid answers in the self-report questionnaire. Participant safety The intervention provides contact information for crisis intervention services as well as emergency numbers of crisis lines and calls on users to urgently seek medical advice in cases of suicidal crises. Since these services are all external, there is no information on how frequently the offers were used by the participants. However, no events that might be associated adversely with the intervention were recorded during the trial by the participating GPs or by the contact persons for the study. In addition, clinically significant deterioration at six months was low: BDI-II deterioration rates in the IG (CG) were 4.5% (9.1%). PHQ-9 deterioration rates at six months were 3.9% and 4.5% in the IG and CG, respectively.
Statistical analysis Principal results The @ktiv trial shows that primary care patients with symptoms of mild to moderately severe depression benefited from augmenting usual care with GP supported self-guided cCBT. Participants with access to moodgym experienced a more pronounced decline in depression symptoms measured by the BDI-II and the PHQ-9 at six months, as compared to patients receiving usual care only. In addition, we observed a small benefit for cCBT on depression (BDI-II) at six weeks. Results of the secondary analysis point to a significant improvement in self-efficacy (EPAS) and quality of life (ED-5D-5L) among participants using moodgym at six months. Deterioration rates within the present study were low (BDI-II: 4.5%; PHQ-9: 3.9%) and comparable with the findings of a recent meta-analysis concerning self-guided cCBT (5.8%) (Karyotaki et al., 2018).
Intention-to-treat analysis Main analysis of outcome scores was intention-to-treat (ITT), as outlined in the guidelines of the CONSORT statement (Campbell et al., 2012). We utilized multilevel mixed-effects linear regression models to estimate mean differences between the treatment groups in primary and secondary outcome scores six weeks and six months after baseline assessment (Rabe-Hesketh and Skrondal, 2012). Indicators of treatment group (IG vs. CG) and time (6 weeks, 6 months follow-up vs. baseline) as well as an interaction between treatment group and time were introduced as fixed effects in the models; the random part included an intercept to control for heterogeneity between patients. The baseline score of a given outcome was included as covariate to control for possible imbalances between the treatment arms and to counteract regression to the mean (Hayes and Moulton, 2017). The model was further adjusted for the following covariates: age, gender, marital status, education, vocational qualification, employment status, domicile, treatment history and comorbid anxiety disorder. These covariates were considered to be prognostic in relation to the outcomes (European Medicines Agency, 2015). Since we have assessed two primary outcomes at two follow-ups, we used the Bonferroni correction to adjust for multiple testing, resulting in a significance level of p i * = p i * 4 for the BDI-II and the PHQ-9; for the secondary outcomes, a significance level of p < .05 was applied. Comparison with prior work Findings are in line with a recently published meta-analysis using individual participant data from 13 studies, including those from REEACT (Karyotaki et al., 2017b). Accordingly, self-guided cCBT was found to be more effective than controls on impacting depression severity (g = 0.27), rendering it a viable alternative to current first-step treatment. Thoroughly supported self-guided cCBT may even encourage more active patient engagement, which might, in turn, be more easily inducible in milder depressed individuals. While both the BDI-II and PHQ-9 showed consistent results at six months, only the BDI-II indicated a significant treatment effect on depression severity at six weeks. Both instruments show good psychometric properties and are widely used in depression trials (Titov et al., 2011). However, the BDI-II assesses a broader range of symptoms known to cover the range of moderate-severe depression more accurately, such as punishment feelings, crying, indecisiveness, irritability, and loss of interest in sex (Kung et al., 2013). The BDI-II may therefore be more sensitive for measuring treatment effect at a short-term followup than the PHQ-9. Future cCBT trials might use instruments that capture the biopsychosocial aspects of depression even more thoroughly, for instance by conducting more flexible structured clinical interviews to establish diagnosis. RCTs exploring the impact of common cCBT programs within established care settings, especially within primary care, are rare but promising and largely support our findings (Proudfoot et al., 2004;Hickie et al., 2010;Høifødt et al., 2013). In contrast, the REEACT trial conducted in the UK concluded that computerized cCBT has no effect over usual GP care (Gilbody et al., 2015). In contrast to Germany, cCBT programs had already been widely promoted and recommended in the UK. Accordingly, it was reported that almost 20% of CG participants had also used cCBT independent of the study. In addition, CG participants reported very large pre-post improvements, which may be related to the care services received during follow-up. For example, 84% of REEACT controls reported the use of depression-related medication, while in the @ktiv trial the proportion was comparatively lower (59%). The effect of moodgym in the @ktiv trial was small, which corresponds with previous meta-analyses of self-guided psychological treatments for depression (Cuijpers et al., 2011). Cuijpers et al. point out that self-guided interventions with a small effect may still have a large impact because of the large number of individuals that can be reached (Cuijpers et al., 2017). The authors make several suggestions with regard to the implementation of Internet interventions within routine care, such as applying self-guided cCBT as a first step in a stepped care approach in order to increase the effects of the "watchful waiting" period (Linden, 2013;Cuijpers et al., 2017). In addition, patients with limited access to mental health services or who are not yet willing to seek professional help could benefit from these kind of interventions (Karyotaki et al., 2017a). GPs attitudes play an important role with regard to the implementation of new treatment modes, such as cCBT, within primary care. For instance, GPs consider the improvement of their treatment plan and a stronger empowerment of patients as an advantage of cCBT (Wilhelmsen et al., 2014). In addition, they value cCBT as an acceptable type of care with regard to early intervention and prevention, alignment with help-seeking preferences and anonymity (Subotic-Kerry et al., 2018). However, results also indicate specific concerns e.g. about receiving adequate care, access problems due to poor Internet connectivity, data security and privacy. The level of adherence to moodgym in the @ktiv trial corresponds to a recently published individual patient data meta-analysis of 10 RCTs, reporting that 17% of participants completed all modules of a self-guided internet-based intervention (Karyotaki et al., 2015), compared to 13% within @ktiv trial. This meta-analysis found a higher risk of study drop-out in men and those with co-morbid anxiety symptoms and a lower risk in older and higher educated individuals. While our study shows similar findings with regard to age, educational level and anxiety symptoms, we could not identify any differences with regard to gender. Since different features of a self-guided Internet intervention may be appealing to different individuals (Karyotaki et al., 2015), the GP could play an important role as a gatekeeper to specialist service, but also as the person who might know his patients best. Furthermore, there is evidence for an association between clinician contact and the rate of patient adherence to cCBT (Hilvert-Bruce et al., 2012). It is concluded that clinician contact may serve as a motivating factor and may therefore enhance adhering to the program. Within the @ktiv trial participating GPs were not instructed to follow a specific motivation strategy to encourage patients to continue with the intervention, in order to be as close as possible to the real world setting. Perhaps, the application of routine enquiries by GPs could positively influence the use of the Internet intervention. The results of a qualitative study of Johansson et al. (2015) suggest that the decision to nonadhere derived from a mismatch between the perceived demands of the treatment (e.g. workload or text-content complexity) and personal prerequisites (e.g. daily routines or perceived language skills). The authors point out that this may be avoided by giving more detailed information on these aspects prior to starting the intervention. Future studies should investigate useful strategies to improve adherence with regard to the primary care setting. These studies should consider mixedmethod designs to explore potential reasons for non-adherence and how to overcome these issues. Further, it should be noted that the @ktiv trial refers to the program version valid at that time, which still used a rather old-fashioned website design. In 2017, the intervention became available with a new website design, which might have a positive impact on user's adherence. A recently published systematic review (Rost et al., 2017) on user acceptance of cCBT, including moodgym, has shown the overall majority of patients experience cCBT for depression as predominantly positive. Within @ktiv trial acceptance rates were somewhat lower. The different results may be due to methodological issues regarding acceptability assessment. In addition, the level of guidance might play an important role in this context. Moreover, in the majority of trials participants were recruited on self-selection basis via media advertisements and may therefore be higher in motivation and satisfaction per se (Andersson and Cuijpers, 2009).
Per protocol analysis In addition to ITT analysis as per protocol (PP) analysis was performed, including only IG participants who have actually used the intervention. We used mixed-effects linear regression models for primary and secondary outcome scores on that restricted sample following the same procedure outlined above. Results of the regression analyses are presented as adjusted mean differences in outcome scores between the treatment groups at six weeks and six months follow-up. We further report standard effect sizes of treatment on study outcomes at follow-up (Cohen's d), using the adjusted mean scores obtained from the mixed models. In addition, we calculated the number needed to treat (NNT) in accordance with the methods outlined in da Costa et al. ( 2012), using pre-specified cut-off scores to define remission status: BDI < 9 (Reeves et al., 2012), PHQ-9 < 5 (Schueller et al., 2015), EPAS > 12.1 (scale mean), EQ-5D-5 L > 91.5 (Hinz et al., 2014). Further, rates for remission (BDI-II score of ≤ 9, PHQ-9 score < 5) and response (score decrease of 50% from baseline) are reported with regard to the primary outcomes (Reeves et al., 2012;Schueller et al., 2015). Finally, we used the reliable change index (RCI) to classify whether changes in the individual's primary outcome scores are considered clinically significant (Jacobson and Truax, 1991). In particular, we defined clinically significant deterioration as a reliable change of 1.96 times the measure's RCI in the dysfunctional direction (i.e., increase in outcome score from baseline to post-treatment equivalent to the 95% confidence interval). The calculation relied on the pre-treatment standard deviation and test-retest reliability of the primary outcomes in the trial (BDI-II = 0.90; PHQ-9 = 0.82). All analyses were performed using the Stata 13.1 SE software package (StataCorp LP, College Station, TX). A clustered sandwich estimator with GP code as clustering variable was used in all models for calculating standard errors. Strengths and limitations Strengths of the @ktiv trial include a large sample size, a broad focus on severity of depression including mild to moderately severe depression, and a high degree of external validity for the primary care setting. In addition, since the intervention was only freely available in Germany after the trial was finished a potential crossover effect can be excluded. However, the @ktiv trial is not without limitations. First, the initial response rate of contacted GPs was low, which might reflect negative attitudes toward Internet interventions that have been reported for therapists before (Waller and Gilbody, 2009). However, since German GPs mainly work in private practices and are reimbursed fee-for-service, the low response rate may also be explained by a general lack of interest in participating in clinical studies, which require time and effort. Related to this, a number of GP practices within the @ktiv trial stated this as a reason for not being able to recruit patients after group allocation. Second, given the nature of cluster randomization, GPs were not masked to treatment. As a result, although randomization of GPs to the treatment arms worked as intended, patient groups were not completely balanced at baseline, which is not unlikely in cluster RCTs but may have introduced selection bias (Hayes and Moulton, 2017). We therefore conducted a number of sensitivity analysis using methods from observational studies (Khandker et al., 2009;Hainmueller, 2012;Hernán et al., 2013) in order to balance covariates and outcomes between the treatment groups at baseline and re-estimate treatment effects. Results of these additional analyses revealed comparable results, confirming the findings of our ITT analysis (results available upon request). Third, the assessment of inclusion and exclusion relied solely on GP diagnosis according to ICD-10. Depression diagnosis had to be supported by PHQ-9 in order to fulfill the inclusion criteria for study participation. Although structured clinical interviews represent the gold standard for diagnosing mental disorders, this study focused on the pragmatic and real world GP setting. Fourth, we missed data of those patients, who had been approached by their GP, but declined participation in the study. This is a frequent hazard in naturalistic research. As a result, we cannot entirely rule out a selection bias which may reduce the external validity of our results. Fifth, both IG and CG participants had access to TAU treatment. As a result, primary outcome changes need to be interpreted with caution, as within-group changes might have been additionally affected by factors related to TAU, such as psychological treatment or medication. Of note, health-economic analyses of the present trial data are under preparation and will be able to shed more light on this. Sixth, the presented results might be specific for the German population of primary care patients and might not be generalizable for other countries with different health care systems. Finally, we have used monetary incentives for GPs and patients to encourage participation and minimize loss to follow-up. Incentives were not linked to any provision of services and were given up front to participants of both groups. While this is considered best practice for improving retention in RCTs (Brueton et al., 2017), we cannot completely rule out the possibility that incentives might have affected the results.
Ethics approval The trial was approved by the IRBs (Ethics Committees) of the University of Leipzig (reference number 222/14ff) and of the Australian National University (reference number 2013/342). In addition, the data handling protocol for the trial was approved by the Commissioner for Data Privacy of the University of Leipzig (date: 18.12.2013). Conclusions The @ktiv trial provides evidence that mildly and moderately severe depressed GP patients benefit from having augmented usual care by the use of cCBT. In contrast to other countries such as Australia or the UK, cCBT is not yet well known to German patients and providers (Dorow et al., 2017), and efforts should be made to raise awareness about the potential of such treatment options for example via medical societies, health care providers, health magazines or digital and social media. From a public health perspective, freely available cCBT programs could make an important contribution, as access is prompt and easy. Taking advantage of self-management cCBT programs may enhance GP care for depression, as it allows GPs to provide their patients with easy and open access to psychological treatment (Karyotaki et al., 2017b). Therefore, it can be considered a valuable treatment option in a stepped-care approach for patients under careful observation by their GPs until specialist treatment, if necessary, can start and for patients not willing or able to seek further mental health specialist care for various reasons (Riedel-Heller, 2017). In addition, providing cCBT via collaborative care could be an effective implementation strategy for selfguided cCBT in primary care as well (Rollman et al., 2018). Future studies incorporating qualitative and quantitative methods are strongly recommended in order to investigate different implementation modes and to determine how uptake of and adherence to computerized or internet-based delivery could be improved.
Methods Trial registration German Clinical Trials Register (number DRKS00005075).
