METHODS The MetroWest Adolescent Health Survey is a biennial census survey of high school students in the western suburbs and small cities of the Boston metropolitan area that has the goal of monitoring trends to inform local and regional school and community policies and practices. The region is home to 26 high schools serving predominantly middle-and upper-middle class families. The survey employs a census rather than sampling procedure so that each district can monitor student behaviors and identify health issues that may vary by grade, gender, and other sociodemographic characteristics. In fall 2008, 22 of 26 high schools in the region participated in the survey; these schools serve 86% of all public high school students in the region. Pencil and paper, anonymous surveys were conducted with all 9th-through 12th-grade students present on the day of administration. Parents and guardians were notified in advance and given the opportunity to view the survey and opt out their child(ren); students also provided assent. Youths (n= 20406) completed the surveys, for a participation rate of 88. 1% (range, 75.2%---93.7%). Reflecting differences in school size, the number of students participating at each site ranged from 303 to 1815. RESULTS Table 1 presents the sociodemographic characteristics of participants. Three quarters (75.2%) of the youths were non-Hispanic White, consistent with regional demographics. About 6% of youths reported that they were gay or lesbian, bisexual, other, or not sure (nonheterosexually identified youths).
Measures To facilitate comparison with state and national data, most items in the MetroWest Adolescent Health Survey were drawn from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's Youth Risk Behavior Survey 37 and the Massachusetts Youth Risk Behavior Survey. 38 Bullying. Students were asked about cyberbullying victimization and school bullying victimization in the past 12 months. Cyberbullying was measured with the following question: ''How many times has someone used the Internet, a phone, or other electronic communications to bully, tease, or threaten you?'' School bullying was measured by the following question: ''During the past 12 months, how many times have you been bullied on school property?'' with bullying defined as ''being repeatedly teased, threatened, hit, kicked, or excluded by another student or group of students.'' Responses from these 2 questions were categorically grouped into 4 categories of bullying victimization: cyberbullying victim only, school bullying victim only, both cyber and school bullying victim, and neither. Psychological distress. Depressive symptoms, suicidal ideation (seriously considering suicide), and suicide attempts (any attempt and an attempt requiring medical treatment) were measured using items about behavior in the past 12 months. 37 Self-injury was assessed by the item ''How many times did you hurt or injure yourself on purpose? (For example, by cutting, burning, or bruising yourself on purpose).'' 38 Responses were dichotomized into yes or no categories. Sociodemographics. Sociodemographic characteristics included gender, grade (9---12), race/ethnicity (Asian, African American or Black, Hispanic or Latino, Caucasian or White, or mixed or other), and sexual orientation (responses grouped as ''heterosexually identified'' vs ''nonheterosexually identified,'' the latter of which encompassed gay or lesbian, bisexual, other, and not sure). Individual-level school characteristics. School performance was measured through self-reported grades coded as ''mostly As,'' ''mostly Bs,'' ''mostly Cs,'' and a combined category encompassing ''mostly Ds,'' ''mostly Fs,'' and ungraded or other. School attachment was measured using a 5-item scale from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health 39 ; scale scores were divided into tertiles (low, medium, high). School size. Schools were grouped into 3 categories on the basis of the size of student enrollment: < 750 students, 750---1250 students, and >1250 students. Prevalence and Overlap of Cyberbullying and School Bullying Victimization Overall, 15.8% of students reported cyberbullying, and 25.9% reported school bullying in the past 12 months. The overlap between cyberbullying and school bullying was substantial: 59.7% of cyberbullying victims were also school bullying victims, and 36.3% of school bullying victims were also cyberbullying victims. When categorized into 4 groups on the basis of reports of cyber and school bullying victimization, one third of all students were bullying victims: 6.4% were victims of cyberbullying only, 16.5% of students were victims of school bullying only, and 9.4% were victims of both school and cyberbullying.
Data Analysis We generated descriptive statistics on the prevalence of bullying victimization and psychological distress. We used cross-tabulations to examine bivariate associations of victimization with sociodemographic (gender, grade, race/ethnicity, and sexual orientation), selfreported school performance, and school attachment and psychological distress indicators. We used binomial logistic regression analysis to examine the relationship between bullying victimization and psychological distress, adjusting for sociodemographics, school performance, school attachment, and school enrollment size. Because of the large sample size, we used P values < .01 and 99% confidence intervals (CIs) to identify statistical significance. School size was not associated with victimization or psychological distress indicators and was not included in final regression models. We used SPSS version 18.0 (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL) for all analyses. Correlates of Bullying Victimization Regarding overall cyberbullying and school bullying victimization, reports of cyberbullying were higher among girls than among boys (18.3% vs 13.2%), whereas reports of school bullying were similar for both genders (25.1% for girls, 26.6% for boys). Although cyberbullying decreased slightly from 9th grade to 12th grade (from 17.2% to 13.4%), school bullying decreased by nearly half (from 32.5% to 17.8%). Nonheterosexually identified youths were far more likely than were heterosexually identified youths to report cyberbullying (33.1% vs 14.5%) and school bullying (42.3% vs 24.8%). There were no differences in overall reporting of cyberbullying or school bullying by race/ethnicity. Whereas there was little difference by gender, race/ethnicity, and grade, nonheterosexually identified youths were more likely to be victims of cyberbullying only, compared with those who self-identify as heterosexual (10.5% vs 6.0%). Youths who reported lower school performance and lower school attachment were also more likely to be victimized with cyberbullying only; for example, students who received mostly Ds and Fs were twice as likely to be cyber-only victims compared with students who received mostly As (11.3% vs 5.2%). In contrast to reports of the cyber-only group, victimization on school property decreases substantially from 21.4% in 9th grade to 10.6% in 12th grade. There was little difference by gender or race/ethnicity. Consistent with the cyber-only group, nonheterosexually identified youths were at higher risk of school-only victimization (19.5% vs 16.3%); school-only victimization was also associated with lower school attachment. Although there was little difference by gender for the other victimization groups, girls were more likely than were boys to be victims of both types of bullying (11.1% vs 7.6%). Like the cyber-only and school-only groups, sexual orientation was associated with reports of both cyber and school victimization; 22.7% of nonheterosexually identified youths were victims of both types of bullying compared with 8.5% of heterosexually identified youths. In addition, the associations between dual forms of victimization and school variables were stronger: students who received mostly Ds and Fs were more than twice as likely as were students who received mostly As to be victims of both forms of bullying (16.1% vs 7.4%), and students in the lowest school attachment tertile were nearly 3 times as likely to report both forms of victimization than were students in the highest tertile (14.9% vs 5.6%). Thus, youths who were in lower grades and nonheterosexually identified youths were more likely to be victims of one or both types of bullying, as were students who reported lower grades and lower levels of school attachment.
METHODS The MetroWest Adolescent Health Survey is a biennial census survey of high school students in the western suburbs and small cities of the Boston metropolitan area that has the goal of monitoring trends to inform local and regional school and community policies and practices. The region is home to 26 high schools serving predominantly middle-and upper-middle class families. The survey employs a census rather than sampling procedure so that each district can monitor student behaviors and identify health issues that may vary by grade, gender, and other sociodemographic characteristics. In fall 2008, 22 of 26 high schools in the region participated in the survey; these schools serve 86% of all public high school students in the region. Pencil and paper, anonymous surveys were conducted with all 9th-through 12th-grade students present on the day of administration. Parents and guardians were notified in advance and given the opportunity to view the survey and opt out their child(ren); students also provided assent. Youths (n= 20406) completed the surveys, for a participation rate of 88. 1% (range, 75.2%---93.7%). Reflecting differences in school size, the number of students participating at each site ranged from 303 to 1815. Bullying Victimization and Psychological Distress Table 3 presents bivariate associations between types of bullying victimization (cyberonly, school-only, both, or neither) and 5 indicators of psychological distress. Bullying victimization was consistently and robustly associated with an increased likelihood of psychological distress across all measures from depressive symptoms and suicidal ideation to reports of self-injury and suicide attempts. Furthermore, the relationship between victimization and distress was strongest among students who were victims of both cyber and school victimization, followed by victims of cyberbullying only and then victims of school bullying only. For example, reports of depressive symptoms were highest among victims of both cyber and school bullying (47.0%), followed by cyber-only victims (33.9%), and school-only victims (26.6%) compared with 13.6% of nonvictims. Similarly, attempted suicide was highest among victims of both cyber and school bullying (15.2%); however, it was also elevated among cyber-only victims (9.4%) and school-only victims (4.2%) compared with students reporting neither form of victimization (2.0%). Table 4 displays logistic regressions modeling the relationship between type of bullying victimization and psychological distress, adjusting for the sociodemographic and individual-level school variables identified earlier as significant correlates of victimization. Consistent with the bivariate associations, there were strong relationships between bullying victimization and psychological distress across all indicators of distress. Overall, the risks of experiencing psychological distress were greatest for victims of both cyber and school bullying. For example, compared with nonvictims, victims of both cyber and school bullying were more than 4 times as likely to report depressive symptoms (adjusted odds ratio [AOR] = 4.38; 99% CI = 3.76, 5.10), suicidal ideation (AOR = 4.51; 99% CI = 3.78, 5.39), and self-injury (AOR = 4.79; 99% CI = 4.06, 5.65), and more than 5 times as likely to report a suicide attempt (AOR = 5.04; 99% CI = 3.88, 6.55) and a suicide attempt requiring medical treatment (AOR = 5.42; 99% CI = 3.56, 8.26). Victims of cyberbullying only were also at a heightened, but somewhat lower risk of psychological distress (AORs from 2.59 to 3.44). The risk was still notable, but even lower, among victims of school bullying only (AORs from 1.51 to 2.20) compared with nonvictims.
