METHOD Participants were recruited through a popular teen Web site (http://www.bolt.com) from August through October 2005. Through a link on the site, youth were invited to respond to a survey designed ''to find out about teens' experiences communicating with one another on the Internet, in school, and using cell phones.'' Participants were informed that we were ''especially interested in things that happen online that are mean or rude.'' To minimize self-selection bias (eg, sampling primarily bullied youth), we did not refer to ''bullying'' or ''cyberbullying.'' Upon completion of the survey, interested participants were entered into a raffle for either an iPod (with lower odds) or a $30 gift certificate to Amazon.com (with higher odds). No parental consent was required because the recruitment took place via the Internet and because the survey was anonymous. We assumed that parental consent would have discouraged participation of individuals concerned about their parents' monitoring their Internet use-the very group that might be most at risk for cyberbullying. Participants were informed that they could refuse to answer any question or withdraw from the study at any time, an act facilitated by the study's online format, in which they could simply log off the study Web page at any point and immediately withdraw from the research without having to explain themselves or be identified in any way. RESULTS The Results section is divided into 4 main sections: electronic communication use and prevalence of bullying, risks associated with repeated cyberbullying, assumptions about cyberbullying, and prevention tactics used.
Sample The analysis sample consisted of one thousand four hundred fifty-four 12-to 17-year-olds (mean = 15.5, SD = 1.47), 75% of whom were female. Sixty-six percent of survey respondents were Caucasian, 12% African American (or African), 9% Mexican American or Latino, and 5% Asian, including Pacific Islanders. All 50 states were represented in the current sample. With the highest proportion from California and New York (102 and 100 respondents, respectively), 30 states contributed 10 or more respondents. Apart from the 4% of participants who were homeschooled, the majority of schools attended by participants were public (84%) and served communities in which, according to participants, most or all students had home access to the Internet (94%). Only 6% (n = 92) of participants who did not complete the survey finished prior to reaching any questions concerning bullying experiences. This group did not differ from the analysis sample on any demographic variables and was excluded from the final sample of 1454 participants. Electronic Communication and Prevalence of Bullying The vast majority of the respondents had used the Internet for more than 3 years and had gone online the day prior to completing the survey (Table 1). Compared to 12-to 14-year-olds, 15-to 17-year-old youth were significantly more likely to have more than 3 years' experience using the Internet, v 2 (91, 1454) = 27.4, p, .001. E-mail and IM were the communication tools most frequently used by respondents. (Of the sample, 49% reported daily e-mail use and 58% reported daily IM.) More than half of the sample at least occasionally used profile sites, blogs, cell phone text messaging, chat rooms, and message boards (Table 1). Webcam use was least common within this sample of youth. Chi-square test by age and gender revealed that 15-to 17-year-olds and girls were significantly more frequent users of e-mail, profile sites, blogs, and cell phones than were 12-to 14-year-olds and boys (v 2 = 7.5 and 28.7, respectively). To assess the reliability of reported incidents, prevalence estimates for online and in-school bullying were computed by relying on 2 methods. First, based on the single item assessing the number of incidents encountered within the past year, 72% of the youth reported having experienced at least 1 incident of bullying in cyberspace, and 77% of youth reported a minimum of 1 situation of bullying in school. A second estimation method entailed summing across the 5 different forms of bullying experiences. The resultant estimate for online bullying was identical to that obtained by the single frequency count (ie, 72%). The composite across the 4 types of in-school incidents yielded a 3% higher estimate (80%) than the single item assessing the frequency of school-based bullying within the past year. When comparing the overlap among reports of online vs in-school bullying, a chisquare test indicated that 85% of youth who reported experiencing at least 1 incident of online bullying also reported experiencing at least 1 incident in school within the past year, v 2 (1, 1217) = 105.0, p, .001. Hence, the probability of getting bullied online was substantially higher for those who were bullied in school. Most youth reported that incidents occurred infrequently: 41% of respondents reported 1-3 incidents, and 13% reported 4-6 incidents in the past year. Almost one fifth of participants (19%), however, experienced 7 or more incidents of online bullying in the past year. A paired t test comparing the number of bullying incidents each participant reported in school and online in the past year revealed that respondents encountered school-based bullying with significantly greater frequency, mean school-based = 1.45, SD = 1.26 and mean online = 1.33, SD = 1.26 (on a 0-4 Likert-type scale indicating frequency in the past year), t(1217) = 3.27, p, .002. The frequency of online and in-school bullying experiences was significantly correlated, r =.45, p, .001. The most prevalent forms of bullying online and in school involved name-calling or insults (Table 2). Password theft was the next most common cyberbullying tactic. Other than password violations, additional forms of online bullying were similar in type to those taking place at school. According to participants, even the unauthorized sharing of embarrassing or private pictures or other private information, which might be expected to be higher online, occurred at similar rates in school. Across the entire sample of Internet users, the most likely communication tools implicated in cyberbullying involved IM (19%) and message boards (16%). Because the sample was rather selective in relying on 22) 85 ( 23) 55 ( 28) 174 (24) *Respondents were asked to indicate how often they currently use each tool, from never to every day. All those who indicated greater frequency than never were defined as users. † The percentage scores are adjusted to the number of no-responses varying (n = 6-27) across the electronic communication tools. certain tools less frequently (eg, message boards, Webcam) than others (eg, e-mail, IM), we analyzed the likelihood of encountering incidents via specific tools. When adjusting for the use of a particular communication tool, cyberbullying experiences remained most common among those who use message boards (26%) and IM (20%) and were least frequently encountered among those who have profile sites (4%) (Table 2).
Measures Online Experience and Communication Tool Use. To be able to control for any possible differences based on history of online experiences, we asked respondents to indicate on a 5-point scale how long they have used the Internet (''6 months'' to ''more than 3 years''). To obtain an estimate of daily Internet use consistent with previous surveys, 23 we also asked participants how long they spent online the day prior to completing the survey on a 6-point scale (response options ranged from ''did not go online'' to ''more than four hours''). Using a 5-point scale ranging from ''never'' to ''every day,'' participants indicated how often they use the following electronic communication tools: e-mail, IM, chat rooms, blogs (ie, online journals or opinion pages that are available for others to read), personal profile Web sites (eg, Myspace.com), message boards (ie, asynchronous text-based dialogue about specific topics), cell phones (through which text messages and pictures may be sent), and Webcams (devices that can record and broadcast both still pictures and video). Bullying Experiences. Rather than use the term bullying (with its potentially narrow connotations), we referred to mean things defined as ''anything that someone does that upsets or offends someone else,'' including name-calling, threats, sending embarrassing/ private pictures, and sharing private information without permission. The types of experiences assessed were based on adolescent focus groups and research on bullying with middle and high school students. 24 Certain forms of in-school bullying, such as physical attacks, were not included in the survey because they are less common among adolescents than among younger children and do not correspond directly to online experiences. Specifically, youth reported how frequently they had experienced name-calling or insults, threats, spreading of embarrassing or private pictures, sharing of private communications (also known online as ''copy-and-pasting,'' as in when the contents of a private IM conversation are copied and forwarded to multiple others), and password theft (eg, gaining access to one's e-mail or IM account without permission). By relying on a 5-point scale ranging from ''never'' to ''more than 12 times,'' participants were asked separately about corresponding school-based (ie, ''off-line'') and online incidents, a total of 9 questions. In order to reduce response bias and confusion, questions concerning online experiences were separated as much as possible from those concerning in-school experiences. Additionally, respondents reported whether they encountered online mean things via e-mail, IM, cell phone text messaging, in a chat room, blog, personal profile site, and/or message boards; multiple responses were allowed. Assumptions About Cyberbullying. To test the assumption that cyberbullying is especially detrimental to the psychological well-being of youth, we examined the association between experiences of online intimidation and social anxiety when taking into account school-based bullying experiences. Social anxiety was assessed with 6 items (eg, ''I worry what others think about me'') from a scale (a =.84) developed for use with adolescents. 25 To test the anonymity assumption, respondents rated their degree of certainty about the identity of the person who had bullied them online using a 5-point scale ranging from ''not at all'' to ''totally sure.'' In addition, they rated whether they knew the person or people involved from school, offline but not school (eg, from after-school activities, camps, neighborhood) and online only, or whether they did not know the perpetrator. Participants also indicated whether they ''did something to get even'' or ''got back at them so they'd leave me alone'' in response to being bullied and, if so, whether they had retaliated online, off-line (ie, in school or elsewhere in person), or both. 9 Youth were also asked whether they usually told adults when they were bullied online and, if not, why not. Answer choices included concern over parental restrictions concerning Internet use as well as a belief in need to learn to deal with such incidents themselves. Reliance on Prevention Tactics. Finally, we probed about prevention tactics provided by the technology (ie, blocking someone, sending a warning, switching a screen name, restricting a buddy list to those whom they wish to hear from) that help youth avoid mean messages online. All the above questions allowed respondents to indicate multiple responses. For example, participants might indicate that they had been bullied both by peers at school and by people whom they know only from online or that they had relied on more than 1 prevention tactic. Risk Associated With Repeated Cyberbullying We used logistic regression analyses to predict the risk of repeated experiences of cyberbullying. Based on previous research, we defined repeated experiences as 7 or more incidents in the past year. 13,21 Using this criterion, the group of repeatedly cyberbullied consisted of 19% of the entire sample. In addition to testing the predictive effects of age, gender, and repeated school-based bullying experiences, we examined whether heavy Internet use (more than 3 hours the day prior to survey) and reliance of each of 7 communication tools predicted repeated cyberbullying. Heavy Internet use indeed significantly increased the likelihood of repeated online intimidation (Table 3). When controlling for Internet use, repeated schoolbased bullying experiences (7 or more times during the past year) increased the likelihood of cyberbullying almost 7-fold. Moreover, the analyses indicated that those who used IM and Webcams were each about 1.5-2.8 times as likely to be repeatedly cyberbullied compared to nonusers of these communication tools. To be able to further understand the risks of repeated cyberbullying involved with each electronic communication tool, we also computed separate logistic regressions among the users of each tool by comparing light and heavy users. Because the distributions of the amount of time spent across the tools varied considerably, we identified light and heavy use in relative terms based on the respective distribution of time spent on each tool. These analyses replicated the effects of repeated school-based bullying and heavy Internet use. Consistent with the previous analyses comparing users and nonusers, Webcam users who reported using the tool at least once or twice a week were 1.75 times more likely to report repeated cyberbullying in the past year. In addition, these analyses revealed that among message board users, use of boards ''most days of the week or more'' significantly increased the likelihood of repeated cyberbullying (ORs = 1.67). Thus, the risk of repeated cyberbullying was significantly predicted not only by the use (vs nonuse) of IM and Webcams but also by relatively heavy (vs light) use of Webcams as well as message boards.
Data Analysis Because 15-to 17-year-old girls were overrepresented in our sample, participants' Internet use and experience are analyzed by age and sex using chisquare tests. Rates of reported school-based and online bullying incidents and their overlap are also assessed by relying on chi-square statistics. To be able to examine risk factors for repeated cyberbullying, odds ratios are computed through logistic regression analyses. The associations between social anxiety and school-based as well as online bullying are, in turn, tested by relying on hierarchical regression analyses. All other data regarding the types of cyberbullying incidents, electronic communication tools involved, assumptions about cyberbullying, and the respondents' reliance on prevention strategies are summarized in percentages. Gender and age differences are noted only when they are statistically significant. Assumptions About Cyberbullying Distress. The above analyses suggest that online and off-line experiences of bullying largely overlap. The question is whether cyberbullying incidents are related to social anxiety over and above school-based bullying experiences. To examine this question, we conducted hierarchical regression analysis. When controlling for gender and age, the number of bullying incidents experienced in school and in cyberspace each independently increased reported levels of social anxiety (Table 4). In other words, online experiences of bullying are associated with elevated level of distress much like encounters of bullying encountered in school. Anonymity. Contrary to common assumptions about the anonymity of cyberbullies, 73% of the respondents were ''pretty sure'' or ''totally sure'' of the identity of the perpetrator. About half of the participants (51%) reported experiencing online bullying by schoolmates, 43% by someone they knew from online only, and 20% by someone known off-line but not from school (recall that participants were free to indicate multiple responses to this question). Thus, the Internet does not seem to protect perpetrators' identity-or, at least, the victims of cyberbullying think they know who is harassing them. Moreover, perpetrators are likely to be peers from school or other off-line contexts. Retaliation. Were victims of school-based bullying especially likely to retaliate online? Among the 48% of school-based victims who reported retaliating against their presumed aggressor(s), the most likely site for retaliation was school (60%), not cyberspace (12%); 28% of school-based victims reported retaliating both in school and online. Thus, these data do not support the assumption about youth taking advantage of the anonymity of cyberspace but provide further evidence for the integral connection between the online and school lives of youth. Reporting to Adults. As presumed, most youth (90%) reported not telling adults about cyberbullying incidents. The most common reason for not telling an adult, cited at equal rates across age and gender, was that participants believe they ''need to learn to deal with it'' themselves (50%). In addition, almost one third of the sample (31%) reported that the reason they do not tell is because they are concerned that their parents might find out and restrict their Internet access. This concern was significantly more common among 12-to 14-year-old girls (46% of 12-to 14-year-old girls vs 27% of 12-to 14-year-old boys), v 2 (1, 282) = 8.57, p, .004. Also, one third of 12-to 14-year-olds reported that they do not tell an adult out of fear that they could get into trouble with their parents. Thus, the fear of restrictions may deter youth, especially younger girls, from sharing their negative experiences with adults.
METHOD Participants were recruited through a popular teen Web site (http://www.bolt.com) from August through October 2005. Through a link on the site, youth were invited to respond to a survey designed ''to find out about teens' experiences communicating with one another on the Internet, in school, and using cell phones.'' Participants were informed that we were ''especially interested in things that happen online that are mean or rude.'' To minimize self-selection bias (eg, sampling primarily bullied youth), we did not refer to ''bullying'' or ''cyberbullying.'' Upon completion of the survey, interested participants were entered into a raffle for either an iPod (with lower odds) or a $30 gift certificate to Amazon.com (with higher odds). No parental consent was required because the recruitment took place via the Internet and because the survey was anonymous. We assumed that parental consent would have discouraged participation of individuals concerned about their parents' monitoring their Internet use-the very group that might be most at risk for cyberbullying. Participants were informed that they could refuse to answer any question or withdraw from the study at any time, an act facilitated by the study's online format, in which they could simply log off the study Web page at any point and immediately withdraw from the research without having to explain themselves or be identified in any way. Prevention Tactics Used Of the prevention strategies enabled by the technology used, blocking a particular screen name was the most common tactic used. Sixty-seven percent of the sample had blocked someone in the past. One third (33%) had restricted particular screen names from their buddy list. About one fourth of the sample had switched a screen name (26%) and had sent a warning (25%) to someone to prevent cyberbullying. Because most of these tactics are particularly relevant to IM as one of the most prevalent forms of electronic communication, we also compared the rates of tactics used specifically among those who had encountered cyberbullying on IM. These analyses showed that 75% of those who encountered an IM incident had blocked a screen name, 45% had restricted their buddy list, 44% had switched their own screen name, and 34% had sent someone a warning. Thus, although youth who have encountered a cyberbullying incident on IM rely on these tactics more frequently than those who have not experienced such encounters, the tactics appear underutilized. For example, one quarter of youth who had experienced online intimidation on IM had never blocked a screen name.
