METHOD A total of 432 students (193 boys and 239 girls) in grades 7-9 were selected from nine junior high schools from middle class, ethnically diverse communities in Calgary. Schools were randomly selected and only those adolescents with signed consent were permitted to participate. A research assistant administered questionnaires to students in class and informed them that they were not obligated to complete the questionnaire and not to record their names to ensure anonymity. Approximately 15 minutes was required to complete the questionnaire. RESULTS
Measures The authors developed a 15-item survey to address the purpose of this study (see Appendix). These items are based on the first author's experience working in schools, conducting research, and hearing students' disclosures of cyberharassment. A definition of harassment developed by Olweus (1996) and frequently used in research was included at the beginning of the survey to clarify its meaning. Open-ended questions asked about the types of technology used to harass students and details about the incidents. Closed-ended questions asked about the frequency of hearing about, experiencing and engaging in cyberharassment, emotional and behavioral responses, and the relation between cyberharassment and other forms of harassment. These responses were rated on a Likert scale from "Never" to "Almost Every Day." The Alpha coefficient of the reliability of the ten items measuring emotional and behavioral responses was .88. 1, students reported being aware of several forms of technology that had been used to harass peers. E-mail or Instant Messaging and the Internet were the most often reported. Specific examples of cyber-harassment were also reported. One student reported hearing of someone sending insults through e-mail to the school principal. Another student indicated that a girl was "dared to take a naked picture and e-mail and post it." In addition, a student reported that a friend received death threats. Only about one third of students (n = 136) indicated they had not heard of any form of cyber-harassment occurring. As shown in Table Regarding victimization, almost one-quarter of students (23%, n = 100) experienced cyber-harassment at least a few times, 35% (n = 148) experienced it once or twice, and 42% (n = 182) never experienced it. Thus, in total 100 students (23%) experienced cyber-harassment a few times or more. A univariate analysis of variance (ANOVA) with student gender, F(1, 430) = .01, p > .05, and grade, F(2, 430) = 1.10, p > .05, as independent factors, showed no main or interaction effects, indicating that boys and girls in lower and higher grades reportedly experience a similar frequency of cyber-harassment. In addition to being aware of incidents and being victimized, some students reported using electronic communications to harass their peers. Specifically, 22% (n = 94) reported doing it once or twice, 4% (n = 15) reported doing it several times or more often, and 74% (n = 318) reported never doing it. ANOVA results indicate that there are no gender or grade differences (p > .05). To determine how students are affected by cyber-harassment, responses to the 10 emotional and behavioral responses were examined (see Table 2). These responses are reported separately because we wanted to know the range of students' experiences of cyber-harassment. Since the total number of students who experienced cyber-harassment is 100, the frequency counts can also be interpreted as percentages. Victims were affected in many ways by the harassment. More than half of the victims (57%) stated that they felt angry on several occasions, and about one-third (36%) reported feeling sad and hurt. An ANOVA was then conducted using the entire sample to determine gender and grade differences using the sum of the ten emotional and behavioral responses to obtain an impact score. No significant differences were found for gender, F(1, 428) = .92, p > .05, or grade, F(2, 428) = .41, p > .05. The relation between cyber-harassment and face-to-face (or traditional school bullying) harassment (without use of electronic communications) was also explored. More than half (64%) of students who were victims of cyber-harassment, also reported victimization by another type of harassment.
