METHOD RESULTS
Recruitment and Retention Participants were randomly selected from an undergraduate introductory psychology course at a large urban university. Potential participants were asked to volunteer for a study, approved by the Temple University Institutional Review Board, in which they would be asked to write about stories related to their lives over several sessions. Because the time commitment involved in this study was greater than that required for course research credit, individuals received both course credit and financial compensation ($10) in exchange for their participation. A total of 99 individuals (49 women) participated in the study. Two participants (one woman) assigned to the written disclosure condition and three participants (2 women) assigned to the control condition completed all three writing sessions but failed to return for the follow-up assessment. These participants did not differ from those who completed the study in terms of their scores on the questionnaire data at baseline or in terms of demographic characteristics. The remaining 94 participants completed all three writing sessions and returned for the follow-up session 1 month later (95% retention rate); these 94 participants were included in subsequent data analyses. Outcome Assessment Participants in the two conditions did not significantly differ in terms of mean age, gender, or racial background. Descriptive information for the outcome measures at baseline and at follow-up assessment, as a function of writing condition and gender, is presented in Table 2.
Participant Characteristics Participants were 94 (men, n ϭ 48; women, n ϭ 46) college students with a mean age of 20.9 years (standard deviation ϭ 4.8). Participants were randomly assigned (within gender) to either the written disclosure condition (n ϭ 51) or the control writing condition (n ϭ 43). The majority of the participants were white (n ϭ 57), with the remaining participants representing a diversity of racial groups (black n ϭ 15, Hispanic n ϭ 8, Asian-American n ϭ 2, and "other" or mixed racial background n ϭ 12). As can be seen in Table 1, the participants assigned to the disclosure condition wrote about highly personal and upsetting experiences that were similar to those written about by participants in other studies of written disclosure (6,7). Psychologic and Physical Health Outcomes of Written Emotional Disclosure To examine condition and gender differences on the outcome measures, a 2 (condition) ϫ 2 (gender) ϫ 2 (time) repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted, with condition and gender as the between-subjects variables and time (baseline, 1-month follow up) as the within-subject variable, separately for each outcome measure (DASS 21 -depression, DASS 21 -anxiety, DASS 21 -stress, and PILL). Results indicated a significant main effect for writing condition for the DASS 21 depression subscale (F[1,90] ϭ 4.30, p Ͻ .05, r effect size ϭ 0.21 (27)); however, this main effect was qualified by a significant condition by time interaction (F[1,90] ϭ 7.95, p Ͻ .01, r effect size ϭ 0.28). No other signif-
Measures Depression and Anxiety Stress Scale-21-Item The Depression and Anxiety Stress Scale-21-Item (DASS 21 (17)) is a 21-item questionnaire consisting of items relating to depression, hyperarousal, and stress. A Likert-type scale is used to rate items according to symptoms experienced in the past week, ranging from 0 (not at all) to 3 (most of the time). Factor analytic studies with both clinical and nonclinical samples have shown that the DASS 21 items can be reliably grouped into three scales: depression, anxiety, and stress (18) and that the measure differentiates between symptoms of anxiety and depression, as well as between symptoms of physical arousal and symptoms of generalized anxiety (e.g., tension (18)). The depression subscale is composed of items that measure symptoms associated with depressed mood (e.g., sadness, worthlessness), whereas the anxiety subscale includes items that are related to symptoms of physical arousal, panic attacks, and fear (e.g., trembling, faintness). Items that measure symptoms such as tension, irritability, and tendency to overreact to stressful events comprise the stress subscale. The DASS 21 depression subscale has been shown to provide a better separation of the features of anxiety and depression than other existing measures of depression and anxiety (17)(18)(19). Two-week retest reliabilities for the DASS 21 subscales were found to be relatively high at 0.71, 0.78, and 0.81, for the depression, anxiety, and stress scales, respectively (19). The DASS 21 was included in this study for the purpose of examining psychologic health outcome in depression, anxiety, and stress symptoms. WRITTEN DISCLOSURE AND GENDER icant main or interaction effects were found. Further examination of the significant condition by time interaction with follow-up simple main-effects analysis indicated that the disclosure participants reported significantly fewer depressive symptoms compared with the control participants at follow up (p Ͻ .01, r effect size ϭ 0.36). Within-group tests (paired t tests) indicated that the disclosure participants reported significantly fewer depressive symptoms at follow up relative to baseline (t[50] ϭ 4.15, p Ͻ .001, r effect size ϭ 0.52), whereas the change in depressive symptoms was not significant for the control participants. To examine whether gender differences in depression symptom reporting over time existed, a one-way ANOVA was conducted using gender as the between-subjects variable (for disclosure condition) and depression change score (baseline-follow up) as the dependent variable. No gender differences in depression symptom reporting over time were found. Examination of the DASS 21 anxiety subscale indicated a significant writing condition by time interaction (F[1,90] ϭ 9.52, p Ͻ .01, r effect size ϭ 0.31), although no other significant effects emerged. Follow-up simple main-effects analysis of the significant interaction indicated that the disclosure participants reported significantly fewer symptoms of anxiety compared with the control participants at follow up (p Ͻ .01, r effect size ϭ 0.24). Within-group analyses indicated that the disclosure participants reported significantly fewer anxiety symptoms at follow up relative to baseline (t[50] ϭ 2.89, p Ͻ .01, r effect size ϭ 0.38), whereas the change in symptoms was not significant for the control participants. Additional ANOVA tests for the disclosure participants indicated that there were no differences between men and women in reported anxiety symptoms over time. A main effect for writing condition for the DASS 21 stress subscale was found (F[1,90] ϭ 10.23, p Ͻ .01, r effect size ϭ 0.32), although it was also qualified by the significant condition by time interaction (F[1,90] ϭ 24.33, p Ͻ .01, r effect size ϭ 0.46). Again, no other significant effects emerged. Follow-up simple main-effects analysis to further explore the significant interaction again revealed that the disclosure condition participants reported significantly fewer stress-related symptoms at follow up compared with the control condition participants (p Ͻ .01, r effect size ϭ 0.33). Within-group analyses also indicated that the disclosure participants reported significantly fewer stress symptoms at follow up compared with baseline (t[50] ϭ 6.06, p Ͻ .001, r effect size ϭ 0.65), whereas the change over time was not significant for the control participants. For the disclosure participants, the change in stress symptoms over time did not differ between men and women. Findings for physical symptom complaints (i.e., PILL) were consistent with the findings for psychologic health. Specifically, a significant writing condition by time interaction was found (F[1,90] ϭ 17.56, p Ͻ .01, r effect size ϭ 0.40), but there were no other significant main or interaction effects. Follow-up tests of simple main effects indicated that the disclosure participants reported fewer physical complaints at follow up relative to the control participants (p Ͻ .01, r effect size ϭ 0.31). Within-group tests indicated that the disclosure participants reported significantly fewer physical symptom complaints at follow up relative to baseline (t[50] ϭ 3.97, p Ͻ .001, r effect size ϭ 0.49), whereas the change over time was not significant for the control participants. For the disclosure participants, the change in physical symptoms over time did not differ between men and women. It should be noted that across all of the outcome measures, the largest effect size for the three-way gender interaction was r effect size ϭ 0.03.
Pennebaker Inventory of Limbic Languidness The Pennebaker Inventory of Limbic Languidness (PILL (20)) is a 54item scale that assesses the frequency of common physical symptoms and sensations. Cronbach alphas range from 0.88 to 0.91 and 2-month retest reliability ranges from 0.79 to 0.83. Previous research indicates that high scores on the PILL are significantly associated with a greater frequency of health center visits, and greater number of days sick and/or work-related absences (20). The overall score on the PILL is obtained by summing the total number of items for which the individual endorsed experiencing the symptom at least once every month. Items include physical symptoms such as runny or congested nose, chills, headaches, fever, and nausea. The PILL was included in this study because it is commonly used in studies of written disclosure and it is a sensitive measure of change in physical symptoms (e.g., 14,15,21,22). Gender Differences in the Process of Written Disclosure Linguistic Analyses Table 3 displays the proportion of word use for each linguistic category examined in this study as a function of condition and gender. To investigate linguistic differences in written disclosure, a 2 (condition) ϫ 2 (gender) ANOVA was conducted separately for the average proportion of positive emotion words, average proportion of negative emotion words, and average proportion of insight/causality-related words derived from the LIWC program. Findings indicated that, as would be expected, the disclosure participants used more negative emotion words (mean ϭ 1.23, standard deviation [SD] ϭ 0.48) compared with the control participants (mean ϭ 0.29, SD ϭ 0.24) (F [1,91] ϭ 134.54, p Ͻ .001, r effect size ϭ 0.60). The disclosure participants also used more positive emotion words (mean ϭ 0.90, SD ϭ 0.54) relative to the control participants (mean ϭ 0.48, SD ϭ 0.23) (F[1,91] ϭ 21.40, p Ͻ .001, r effect size ϭ 0.19). Similarly, the disclosure participants used more insight/causality-related words (mean ϭ 3.74, SD ϭ 1.06) compared with the control participants (mean ϭ 1.87, SD ϭ 0.71) (F [1,91] ϭ 111.08, p Ͻ .001, r effect size ϭ 0.55). A significant main effect for gender
Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count, 2001 The Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count, 20001 (LIWC2001 ( 23)) is a computerized text analysis program that searches individual text files and computes the percentage of words in a variety of word categories (e.g., negative emotion, positive emotion, and insight/causality). The program uses an extensive dictionary file comprised of over 2100 words and word stems to calculate the total number of words, sentences, percentages of unique words, and dictionary words. The sums of each of these scales are converted to a percentage of total words to correct for differences in text length between participants. E. EPSTEIN et al. was also found (F[1,91] ϭ 7.44, p Ͻ .01, r effect size ϭ 0.08) such that women participants used a greater proportion of insight/causality-related words (mean ϭ 3.14, SD ϭ 1.47) relative to men (mean ϭ 2.65, SD ϭ 1.10). However, no significant gender by condition interaction was found for any of the linguistic categories (largest r effect size ϭ 0.03).
E. EPSTEIN et al. For this study, the written essays for each session of each participant were converted to a computer text file, and a linguistic analysis of these text passages was conducted using the LIWC2001. The linguistic indices examined in this study were negative emotion (e.g., sad, afraid, hate, worthless), positive emotion (e.g., happy, love, pride), and insight/causality (e.g., think, know, because). These categories were chosen based on anticipated gender differences in word use. Physiological Reactivity To investigate differences in physiological reactivity during the writing sessions, a 2 (group) ϫ 2 (gender) ϫ 3 (writing session) repeated-measures ANOVA was conducted with HR change score as the dependent variable. 1 Findings indicated a significant condition by time interaction (F[2,83] ϭ 4.31, p Ͻ .05, r effect size ϭ 0.22) with follow-up tests indicating that disclosure participants exhibited significantly greater HR reactivity during the first writing session (mean ϭ 10.40, SD ϭ 1.1) relative to the participants assigned to the control condition (mean ϭ 4.21, SD ϭ 1.1, p Ͻ .01, r effect size ϭ 0.42). 2 No significant group differences in HR reactivity were found for the remaining writing sessions and there were no significant changes in HR noted across the sessions. Contrary to our predictions, no significant gender differences in HR were revealed (three-way interaction r effect size ϭ 0.02). Figure 1 displays HR change score in response to each writing session as a function of condition. To examine the relationship between HR reactivity and outcome, Pearson correlations between HR reactivity to the first writing session and change scores (baseline-follow up) for each of the outcome measures were computed for the disclosure participants only. Findings indicated a significant association between HR reactivity to the first session and reductions in depressive symptoms (r ϭ 0.23, p Ͻ .05) and physical health complaints (r ϭ 0.28, p Ͻ .05). That is, greater HR reactivity to the first writing session was significantly associated with greater reduction in depression symptoms and physical symptom complaints. However, the relationship between HR reactivity to the first session and changes in anxiety and stress symptom reporting was not significant (largest r ϭ 0.10).
Physiological Reactivity Heart rate activity was included in the study to examine physiological arousal during the writing sessions. HR was selected because, although it has been previously shown to be a detectable and sensitive measure of changes in one's psychologic and arousal state (24), it is not sensitive to stimulus novelty, unlike other physiological indices such as salivary cortisol (25). In this study, participants' HR was recorded continuously for both a 5-minute baseline period before the writing session and during each 20-minute writing session using the Polar S810 HR Monitor (Lake Success, NY). The Polar HR Monitor is an ambulatory system that consists of a wristwatch receiver and the T61 transmitter chest strap. A water-soluble transmitting gel was applied to the transmitter chest strap to facilitate conduction. These signals were transmitted to the wristwatch receiver that acquired the interbeat interval (IBI) between R waves, which was subsequently downloaded to a computer text file. HR obtained using the Polar Monitor system has been found to be highly correlated with cardiovascular recordings during exercise, mental challenges (e.g., arithmetic challenges), and resting periods, indicating that the system is a reliable device for recording HR activity in the laboratory (26). Change scores (M writing session HR Ϫ M baseline HR) were computed to examine HR reactivity during the writing sessions. RESULTS
Procedure On arrival for the first session, participants provided written informed consent and were then asked to complete a series of questionnaires, which included a demographics questionnaire, the PDS, the DASS 21, and the PILL. After completion of the questionnaires, participants were asked to put on the HR chest strap, which they were told would record their bodily reactions, and were given instructions for the resting period. During the 5-minute resting period, participants were left alone in a dimly lit room after they had been instructed to relax by focusing on their breathing and clearing their mind of all thoughts. The writing session immediately followed the resting period. Specific writing instructions for each writing condition and session were replicated from the standard instructions developed by Pennebaker (1). Briefly, participants in the written disclosure condition were asked to write about the most distressing experience of their lives with as much emotion and feeling as possible. Consistent with the standard protocol, they were instructed that they could write about the same or different events during each writing session. Those assigned to the control writing condition were asked to write about how they spend their time without any emotion or opinions. Also consistent with the standard protocol, participants in both conditions wrote continuously for 20 minutes each session. The writing sessions took place on 3 consecutive days, with participants writing alone in a private room. After the instructions for the session were presented to the participant, the HR monitor was started and the participant was left alone to complete the writing assignment. After 20 minutes, the experimenter entered the room and stopped the HR recording. With the exception of the questionnaires, the same procedure was replicated for the writing sessions completed on the following 2 days. Participants then returned 1 month later to complete the DASS 21 and the PILL, after which they were fully debriefed regarding the purpose of the study. A 1-month follow-up assessment was used to be consistent with earlier studies of written disclosure (14,15). Outcome Assessment Participants in the two conditions did not significantly differ in terms of mean age, gender, or racial background. Descriptive information for the outcome measures at baseline and at follow-up assessment, as a function of writing condition and gender, is presented in Table 2.
