Participants
Between November 2011 and June 2015, patients from 31 hospitals throughout the Netherlands were invited to participate (see Acknowledgments).
In each hospital, tailored operating procedures were installed for approaching local patients.
Furthermore, advertisements were placed on selected websites, and patient associations helped spread study information.
The recruitment period could not be extended due to funding.
Data collection was finished in June 2016.
Patients who expressed interest in the study completed online screening questionnaires: the Beck Scale for Suicide Ideation (BSS) [24] and the Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) [25].
Adult (> 18 years of age) glioma patients with WHO grade II, III or IV glioma, and at least mild depressive symptoms (CES-D score ≥ 12) were invited to participate.
Similarly, adult (> 18 years of age) patients with non-Hodgkin lymphoma (NHL), chronic lymphatic leukemia (CLL), multiple myeloma (MM), or a myelodysplastic syndrome (MDS) and at least mild depressive symptoms (CES-D score ≥ 12) were invited to participate.
Exclusion criteria were (1) no access to the internet and/or no email address; (2) insufficient proficiency of the Dutch language; (3) suicidal intent as screened for with the BSS and followed-up by telephone if needed to check the severity of symptoms.
If patients were excluded based on suicidal intent, their primary care physician was informed.
All participants provided written informed consent.
Participants
In total, we received 308 responses through email, phone calls, or (in)complete screening questionnaires, see Fig. 2 for consort flow diagram.
Of these, 145 patients could be invited for participation in the study (78.6% glioma, 21.4% non-CNS cancer) and 122 patients agreed to participate (78% glioma, 22% non-CNS cancer).
Before baseline assessment, 6 glioma patients and 1 non-CNS cancer patient dropped out.
In total, 89 glioma patients were randomized to either the GI group (N = 45) or the GWL group (N = 44), and 26 non-CNS cancer controls participated.
The majority of patients were women and had middle to high levels of education, see Table 1.
Glioma patients most often suffered from a grade II tumor.
Approximately 76% of glioma patients were using antiepileptic drugs.
GWL patients experienced more uncertainty concerning the future (M = 52.1, SD = 21.7) than GI patients (M = 42.6, SD = 19.6, p = 0.033).
No other statistically significant differences were observed.
Most non-CNS cancer controls were diagnosed with a non-Hodgkin lymphoma (46.2%), other diagnoses were chronic lymphatic leukemia (11.5%), multiple myeloma (11.5%) and myelodysplastic syndrome (11.5%).
Non-CNS cancer controls were older than patients with glioma (M = 52.8, SD = 9.3 vs M = 45.0, SD = 11.9 p = 0.003); no other statistically significant differences between the groups were observed.
Outside hospital appointments, patients in all groups reported visiting their primary care physician, company physician, physiotherapist, psychologist/psychiatrist/ counsellor, social worker, substance abuse coach, alternative healer, and self-help group (no statistically significant differences, see Table 1).
