Method
Participants and procedure Participants in the present study were 390 adolescents (50% females), from four high schools in Tuscany, Italy. The age of participants ranged from 14 to 18 years (M = 15.6; SD = 1.00) and the majority of students were from Italian backgrounds (90%). To avoid potential biases, the schools were selected balancing students' proportions in relation to the school type. School distribution was as follows: 22.1% of the students attended Lyceum high schools, 37.9% attended Technical Institutes, and 40% attended Vocational Schools. Consent procedure for research consisted of an active approval by the schools and a passive consent by the parents. Due to the prolonged collaboration with these school districts, 100% of the students participated in the research. Trained researchers administered a set of scales tapping different dimensions of psychosocial adjustment in class during school time in about 1 hr. The measures administered involved different risk behaviours (bullying and cyberbullying behaviours), individual values, and morality. The order of the scales was randomized to minimize potential bias. Participants were assured of confidentiality and anonymity of the questionnaires.
Measures
Cyberbullying The multiple-item Cyberbullying Scale (CS) (Menesini, Nocentini, & Calussi, 2011a) was used. After a definition of cyberbullying, 10 items asking about the frequency of different cyberbullying behaviours acted by adolescents in the past 2 months were presented and introduced by the question: 'In the last two months, how often have you done the following things to someone?'. Each item was evaluated along a five-point scale: never, only once or twice, two or three times a month, about once a week, several times a week. Confirmatory factor analysis yielded a monodimensional structure for both genders. Following a suggestion from the study by Menesini et al. (2011a), the item 'silent prank calls' was excluded. Furthermore, given that females presented a frequency less than 1% on three items ('Phone pictures/photos/videos of violent scene', 'Nasty or rude e-mails', 'Unpleasant pictures/photos on Web sites'), they were excluded from the analyses. Thus, the final scale was composed by the following six items: 'nasty text messages' (cs1), 'phone pictures/photos/videos of intimate scenes' (cs2), 'insults on web-sites' (cs3), 'insults on instant messaging' (cs4), 'insults in a chatrooms', (cs5) and 'insults on blog' (cs6). Alpha was .82. Given the high non-normality of the items distribution, we collapsed five categories into two for the analyses (0 = never, 1 = from only once or twice to always).
Traditional bullying A multiple-item scale was used to measure involvement in bullying behaviours (Menesini, Calussi, & Nocentini, 2012). After a definition of bullying, 11 items asking about the frequency of different bullying behaviours acted by adolescents in the past 2 months were presented and introduced by the question: 'In the last two months, how often have you done the following things to someone?' Items comprised the following aspects: physically hurting (b1), calling names (b2), teasing (b3), threatening (b4), leaving out (b5), spreading rumours (b6), bullying because of peer's race/colour (b7), damaging or stealing belongings (b8), bullying because the victim has a disability (b9), bullying because of peer's religion or culture (b10), calling someone gay even if it was not true (b11). Each item was evaluated along a five-point scale: never, only once or twice, two or three times a month, about once a week, several times a week. Preliminary Confirmatory factor analysis yielded a monodimensional structure for both genders. Alpha was .90. Given the high non-normality of the items distribution, we collapsed five categories into two for the analyses (0 = never, 1 = from only once or twice to always).
Individual values Adolescents' values were measured by the Portrait Values Questionnaire (PVQ), developed by Schwartz (1992) and adapted in Italy by Capanna, Vecchione, and Schwartz (2005). The PVQ consists of 40 items, measuring the 10 basic values explained in the Introduction. It includes short verbal portraits of 40 people (matched to the respondent's gender). Each portrait describes the person's goals, aspirations, or wishes, pointing implicitly at the importance of a single broad value (i.e., Power value: 'It is important for her to be rich. She wants to have a lot of money and expensive things'; Conformity value: 'It is important for him always to behave properly. He wants to avoid doing anything people would say is wrong'). For each portrait participants responded to the question 'How much like you is this person?' They checked one of six boxes labelled: very much like me, like me, somewhat like me, a little like me, not like me, and not like me at all (Knafo et al., 2008). On the basis of the two orthogonal dimensions, self-enhancement versus selftranscendence and openness to change versus conservation, four summated scores were computed. The reliability alphas were .74, .83, .60, and .80 for self-enhancement, selftranscendence, openness to change, and conservation, respectively. We decided to use these broad dimensions instead of the 10 single values because, from a methodological point of view, the correlations among values within each dimension are high, as confirmed by the literature, and these general dimensions seem to be closer to adolescents' values system as reported by other papers (e.g., Caprara, Scabini, Steca, & Schwartz, 2011;Liu et al., 2007).
Immoral and disengaged behaviour In order to have a morality measure, we used students' reports on five items: 'I don't feel guilty (m1), I have been mean to others (m2), I am not trustworthy (m3), I have been disobedient at school (m4), I have been disobedient with parents (m5)'. These items were derived from the Youth Self Report (Achenbach & Edelbrock, 1991) and already used in another study about bullying (Pepler et al., 2008). Students rated each question on a three-point scale (0 = not true, 1 = somewhat or sometimes true, 2 = very true or often true). The tenability of the factorial structure for the construct will be carried out in the Structural Equation Model (see the Results section). Alpha was .61.
Statistical analyses In order to investigate whether individual values and morality were related to bullying and cyberbullying and whether gender moderated these relations, Multiple-Group Structural Equation Modeling was used. In particular, the model posited that the four individual values (e.g., self-enhancement, self-transcendence, openness to change, and conservation) are directly associated to bullying and cyberbullying and indirectly associated through the effect of immoral and disengaged behaviour. Although we assumed causal effects, we need to underline that in cross-sectional studies, such as this one, causality cannot be determined: in our study, we intended to investigate whether data were consistent with the hypothesized model. The measurement model was tested for the variables: morality, bullying, and cyberbullying. The following nested models were compared: (1) Unconstrained Multiple-Group Model across gender, in which the same pattern of structural paths was tested without constraints across groups. Measurement invariance for morality and outcome measures were imposed across genders in order to conduct meaningful comparison; (2) Constrained Multiple-Group Model where structural paths were constrained to be equal across groups. The analyses were conducted with MPlus version 4.2 (Muthén & Muthén, 2006). Referring to the categorical nature of the bullying and cyberbullying data, the estimator used for the analysis was a mean-and variance-adjusted least-squares estimator WLSMV (weighted least squared mean variance). Theta parameterization instead of Delta parameterization was used (Muthén & Muthén, 2006). Model fit was evaluated using the 2 statistics, the root mean square error of approximation (RMSEA), and the comparative fit index (CFI). Recommended cut-off points for these measures are .08 (Brown & Cudek, 1993) or .06 (Hu & Bentler, 1998) for RMSEA; .90 (Bollen, 1989) or .95 (Hu & Bentler, 1998) for CFI. In addition to these overall fit indices, the comparison between two nested models is tested through the significance of difference in the2 value1 . Table 1 reports descriptive statistics and correlations between the computed scales.
