Methods
Design A two-armed randomized controlled trial (RCT) was conducted that compared the effectiveness of the Web-based CDMIs with a no-intervention wait-listed control group that had unlimited access to usual care. Participants were assessed at three time points: at baseline and at 3-and 6-month follow-ups. The trial is reported in accordance with the CONSORT-EHEALTH checklist V1. 6
Eligibility Criteria Participants were eligible for participation if they were adults (≥18 years), had access to a computer with an Internet connection, sufficient proficiency of the Dutch language, adequate computer skills to participate in the training, and mild-to-moderate depressive symptoms defined as a score of 14 to 38 on the Inventory of Depressive Symptomatology Self-Report (IDS-SR) [32,33]. These IDS-SR cut-off scores imply that the CDMIs in this study were used for, at least but not limited to, an indicated preventive purpose. Suicidal thoughts or plans, as measured with item 18 of the IDS-SR, were a reason for exclusion (a score of >1 was used; initially a score of >0 was used, but this was deemed too strict). If participants indicated they had suicidal thoughts or plans, they were advised to contact their GP or an anonymous online platform for people with suicidal thoughts or behaviors (113Online [34]).
Recruitment and Procedures Participants were recruited from June 2014 to January 2015 via open recruitment (ie, through relevant websites, messages on social media, and messages in digital newsletters of the Trimbos Institute). People interested in participation were referred to a special study website where they were given more information about the study and could register to take part in the study by completing a written or an online informed consent form including their name and email address. Once informed consent was given, the eligibility criteria were assessed. Applicants were requested to complete the first part of the self-report online baseline questionnaire, which acted as a screening instrument and consisted of the IDS-SR and questions about age, Internet access, and computer skills. People who did not fulfill the inclusion criteria were informed during or immediately after completing the first part of the baseline questionnaire and the reason for exclusion was provided. Eligible participants received the second part of the online baseline questionnaire. To be randomized, the applicants were required to complete the entire baseline questionnaire. To be able to conduct the stratified block randomization, applicants were asked which CDMI they would want to take part in ("sleep better," "stress less," or "worry less"). Randomization to the intervention group or control group occurred automatically using a 1:1 ratio. Directly after randomization, participants allocated to the experimental condition received an email with an activation code for creating an online account that gave them access to the CDMI of their choice. The account was valid for one year. Participants in the control condition were sent an email with the outcome of the randomization, including the message that the CDMI would become accessible to them after 3 months.
Intervention The CDMIs are Web-based self-help interventions without therapist guidance [35], developed by the Trimbos Institute, a nonprofit organization. There are three different CDMIs: "sleep better," "stress less," and "worry less." The CDMIs target people with mild-to-moderate symptoms of depression who experience problems with sleep, stress, or worry. In the interventions, users learn to better understand and deal with the problem of their choice. In fact, a unique feature of the CDMIs as an approach for depressive symptoms is that they were developed taking into account that symptoms of depression or a developing depression vary by individual. Therefore, they are complaint-focused rather than disorder-focused, thus participants can choose the CDMI they want to use based on their personal needs and do not have to use CDMIs that are not relevant to their situation. The primary goal of the CDMIs is to reduce or prevent depressive complaints. Secondary goals are to reduce sleep problems, stress, or worry. The content of the CDMIs is largely based on cognitive behavioral techniques and incorporates elements from solution-focused therapy, mindfulness, and positive psychology. The CDMIs are made up of three to four modules, each module consisting of four to six exercises. Some modules are relevant for sleep, stress, and worry and are, therefore, part of all three CDMIs (eg, the module "relaxation"). Fixed elements in every CDMI are a home page, a diary, a list with the user's favorite exercises, an exercise book, a to-do list, and a library. A more detailed account of the CDMIs (including screenshots) can be found in Multimedia Appendix 2. To gain access to the CDMIs, an account had to be created by entering a username and email address. Users were free to choose between the modules and exercises and could work independently through the CDMI, without supervision. The advised amount of time to spend on the CDMI was 2 to 3 hours a week for a period of at least 4 weeks. In case any assistance was needed during the study, a contact form on the website of the CDMIs could be used or participants in the study could email or call one of the researchers. Participants were allowed to use any other type of care in addition to the online CDMIs.
Control Group Participants in the control group were placed on a waiting list and received access to the online CDMI of their choice after 3 months (following the 3-month postbaseline assessment). The wait-listed participants were aware of this procedure. Participants in the control group were also free to use any other types of care.
Outcomes
Measurements Participants received an email with a personal link to the online questionnaires at baseline (T0) and at 3 and 6 months after baseline (T1 and T2). At every assessment, up to three reminder emails were sent and a reminder phone call was made in case participants did not complete the survey. If there was an indication of suicidal thoughts or plans during the measurement at T1 or T2, these participants were given the same recommendation as at baseline, namely to contact their GP or an anonymous online platform for people with suicidal thoughts or behaviors (113Online [34]). After completion of the questionnaire at T1, the participants in the control condition gained access to the CDMIs provided that they had no suicidal thoughts or plans and no severe depressive symptoms (ie, score >39 on the IDS-SR) as measured at the 3-month postbaseline assessment. Six months after baseline there was an additional assessment (T2) to ascertain whether the effects of the CDMIs were sustained in the experimental condition and to obtain a postintervention measurement in the control condition. The primary and secondary outcomes were assessed at each measurement point.
Primary Outcome The primary outcome of the study was depressive symptomatology as measured by the IDS-SR [32,33]. The IDS-SR consists of 30 items relating to the last 7 days that cover nine diagnostic symptom domains used to characterize a major depressive episode as well as items to define melancholic and atypical symptom features, commonly associated symptoms (eg, irritability, anxiety), and features of endogenous symptoms defined by the Research Diagnostic Criteria [36]. Items are scored on a four-point Likert scale and can be summed to obtain a total score. Scores range from zero to 84, with higher scores indicating greater depressive symptom severity.
Secondary Outcomes Secondary outcomes consisted of the complaints targeted by the CDMIs and additional psychological outcomes, namely sleep problems, stress, worry, anxiety symptoms, and well-being. To determine the frequency of sleep problems, the Jenkins Sleep Evaluation Questionnaire (JSEQ) was used [37]. This questionnaire assesses the frequency of sleep problems in the past month and has been shown to have good internal consistency [27,37]. It consists of four items that are rated on a six-point scale (0=not at all; 5=22-31 days). To obtain a total score, the items are summed. Hence, the range of the total score is zero to 20, with higher scores representing greater sleep disturbance. Stress was evaluated with the Perceived Stress Scale (PSS-10) [38]. The PSS consists of 10 questions and measures the degree to which situations in one's life are appraised as stressful. People are asked to rate on a scale of zero to four (0=never; 4=very often) how often they experienced specific feelings and thoughts during the last month. Scores are summed to produce a total score ranging from zero to 40, with higher scores indicating more stress. Internal consistency has been found to be good (Cronbach alpha range .78-.90) [27,39]. The Penn State Worry Questionnaire (PSWQ) was used to assess the intensity, excessiveness, and uncontrollability of worry [40]. This version consists of 11 items. Respondents can indicate to what degree each item applies to them by giving a score on a five-point Likert scale (1=not at all typical of me; 5=very typical of me). A total score is computed by summing all items (range 11-55), with higher scores indicating a stronger tendency to worry. This instrument shows good psychometric properties including Cronbach alpha as high as .93 [40][41][42][43]. For assessing the severity of anxiety symptoms, the Generalized Anxiety Disorder Scale (GAD-7) was used [44,45]. Respondents are asked to rate seven items over the last 2 weeks on a four-point scale (0=not at all sure; 4=nearly every day). The sum of the seven items represents the total score (range 0-28), with higher scores defining a higher level of anxiety severity. Internal validity is good (Cronbach alpha range .88-.92) [27,45]. Well-being was measured with the Warwick-Edinburgh Mental Well-being Scale (WEMWBS) [46]. All 14 items of this scale are positively worded, cover topics of positive mental health, and show good reliability [27,47]. Items are scored on a five-point Likert scale and summed to obtain a total score, which ranges from 14 to 70. Higher scores indicate a higher state of well-being.
Covariates and Illness Characteristics Demographic variables were assessed at baseline. Data on age (in years), gender (male/female), living arrangements (single/living together), educational level (low/high), work status (paid/unpaid), and gross wage (more/less than €2618, the average monthly Dutch income for 2014) were obtained. Duration of complaints was assessed with an item using a five-point scale asking "how long have the complaints been present?" and dichotomized into less than 1 year (0=a few weeks; 1=a few months; 2=6 months to a year) or 1 year or longer (3=approximately one year; 4=more than one year). Severity of complaints was assessed by an item asking participants to rate their experienced symptom severity level on a five-point scale. Severity of complaints was merged into two categories: low severity (0=not or 1=rather severe) and high severity (2=severe, 3=more than severe, or 4=very severe).
Use of and Satisfaction With Intervention At the 3-month assessment (T1), the participants in the intervention group were asked to rate 15 statements covering satisfaction with the content, effects, usefulness, and overall satisfaction with the CDMIs. Suggestions for improving the intervention were also elicited. Items were rated on a five-point scale (1=completely disagree; 5=completely agree). An example of an item is "The intervention helped me deal with my complaints." Overall satisfaction with the intervention was rated on a scale one to 10 (1=not at all satisfied; 10=very satisfied). Furthermore, participants were asked to estimate the number of minutes that they spent, on average, using the intervention during the 3-month intervention period. For the control group, the satisfaction and use questions were incorporated in the 6-month assessment because they gained access to the CDMI following the T1 assessment. In addition, user logs were used to determine the number of log-ins per participant.
Sample Size Based on Lipsey and Wilson [48], we aimed to detect a standardized effect size (Cohen d) of at least 0.33, which corresponds to the lower bound of a medium effect size. To achieve this effect size of 0.33 with a power of 0.80 and a two-tailed test with alpha of .05, a sample size of 146 participants per condition was needed, thus 292 participants in total. The sample size was calculated prior to the start of the study using Stata version 12.1.
Randomization To guarantee an even distribution of participants with different complaints and education level across the two study conditions, stratified block randomization was used. The block randomization was conducted in a block size of six, stratified by two blocks for level of education (low, high) and three blocks for the preferred type of CDMI intervention (stress, sleep problems, or worry). A computer-generated random allocation sequence was obtained using RANDOM.ORG, which was performed and handled by an independent researcher outside of the research team.
Blinding The participants could not be blinded because they needed to be informed about whether they could start immediately after randomization or after 3 months.
Statistical Analysis Descriptive statistics were used to describe the characteristics of the study sample at baseline. Attrition analysis was conducted by comparing demographic characteristics and primary and secondary outcome variables of the participants who completed the questionnaire at T1 with those who did not complete the T1 assessment. For this purpose, differences between the groups were tested using independent t tests and chi-square statistics. Analyses of the effectiveness of the CDMIs were carried out according to the intention-to-treat principle. Linear mixed models were used to estimate the effects of the CDMIs on the primary and secondary outcomes. This technique allows for the correlation between longitudinal data and uses all available data points, thus not discarding cases due to a missing value. Missing values are accounted for using the maximum likelihood method to estimate coefficients. A random intercept was fitted with an identity covariance structure. Time was defined as the within-group factor and the study condition (CDMI or wait-list) as the between-groups factor. The mean difference in the outcomes between the study conditions over time is expressed by the condition×time interaction. The 6-month follow-up data were analyzed separately for the intervention and control group (ie, only within-group changes analyzed) because the control group had gained access to the CDMI intervention by that time. Growth curves were examined to determine whether any effects in the intervention group remained or increased at 6 months (ie, no significant decrease in effect between T1 and T2) and whether effects increased in the control group after the 3-month follow-up (ie, significant increase in effect between T1 and T2). An exploratory analysis was undertaken into the relationship between intervention use (number of log-ins) and effectiveness within the intervention group during the 6-month intervention period. To this end, the interaction between use and time was tested in a linear mixed model. All analyses were adjusted for baseline demographic factors (age, gender, living arrangement, and education level). Adjustments were also made for factors that were related to dropout as indicated by the attrition analysis. Standardized effect sizes (Cohen d) were calculated using the estimated (adjusted) mean differences of the outcomes from the linear mixed models divided by the pooled standard deviation of the outcomes at baseline. Analyses were performed using SPSS version 22 and Stata version 12.1 statistical software packages.
Methodological Considerations First, we encountered a high dropout rate of participants during the course of the study. High dropout rates are a problem often encountered in eHealth trials [52,53], with rates as high as 50% to 72% reported. Dropout rates tend to be higher for unguided versus guided eHealth trials [53]. Dropout also tends to be higher in intervention groups than control groups as was the case in our study. Although this is not an uncommon occurrence in eHealth studies, it may nonetheless give rise to attrition bias. However, analyses showed that the only measured difference between participants who completed the T1 assessment versus those who did not was the mean score on the GAD-7 (anxiety), which was adjusted for in the analyses. Furthermore, in the analyses, all participants were included according to the intention-to-treat principle and missing data was accounted for by using linear mixed models (ie, maximum likelihood), which is a recommended strategy for estimating unbiased treatment effects [54]. Second, the CDMIs were developed as a preventive approach to depression, but the diagnostic status of the participants in this study was not assessed with a clinical interview because it was not feasible. To avoid being too restrictive and denying people access to the CDMIs who might benefit from the interventions, we included people with mild and moderate depressive symptoms in our trial. We cannot rule out that some participants in the trial might have fulfilled diagnostic criteria for depression at trial entry. Therefore, the findings and effect sizes should be interpreted in light of this fact. Third, the participants could not be blinded. The reduction in complaints observed by the control group at T2 versus T1 were comparable to the reduction seen in the intervention group at T1 versus T0. Therefore, it is likely that the effects found are not largely influenced by the lack of blinding. Another point of consideration is the limited use of the intervention, despite the positive effects. The use of the CDMIs was slightly more limited in the control group. This might have been due to a reduction in complaints in the control condition in the first 3 months of the study, reducing the need for the control condition to use the CDMIs once access was provided. The evaluation of the CDMIs by the users does suggest there is room for improvement of the intervention. Adding reminders was a frequently given suggestion for improvement. However, it would be worthwhile to further question users about strategies that may increase the use of the intervention. We conducted some exploratory analyses to examine the relationship between the number of log-ins and effectiveness, which showed no discernible dose-response relationship. However, it is important to interpret these exploratory findings with caution due to potential selection bias. Moreover, different operationalizations of adherence may be differentially related to effectiveness in eHealth research [55], which would be interesting to examine in future research. Fifth, although our trial applied an open recruitment strategy, meaning that there were no restrictions for participation other than the inclusion criteria, it is possible that potential participants were missed due to the use of mainly Internet-based recruitment avenues. On the other hand, people who do not use the Internet might be less open to using an unguided Web-based self-help intervention. Nevertheless, the participants of the trial might not have truly reflected the general Dutch adult population with access to the Internet and sufficient computer skills. Finally, the study population consisted of mainly highly educated female participants. Therefore, the generalizability of the findings with respect to males and other educational levels remains to be determined. Moreover, as mentioned in the Introduction, the CDMIs were developed to also suit a range of target groups, including the low SES population, but participation in the CDMIs and in this study was not restricted to individuals with a low SES. The baseline characteristics indicate that 72% of the participants had a high educational level. This means that without specific efforts aimed at inclusion of low SES people, the usage of the intervention among this group will be relatively low.
Future Research Directions Integration of the CDMIs in primary care may be a useful next step for several reasons. As mentioned in the Introduction, patients frequently present to their GP with psychological stress, sleep problems, and worry [17][18][19][20][21]. Moreover, the guidelines of the Dutch College of General Practitioners recommend e-mental health as first step interventions for patients with depressive complaints. During and after the trial, we received several requests from GPs and GP nurses for information about and the use of the CDMIs. As such, the CDMIs seem to be suitable interventions for use in the GP setting that satisfy a demand. When implementing the interventions in the GP setting, the CDMIs can also be offered with some guidance from the GP nurse, which might be a way of boosting adherence and effectiveness [30,31]. Guidance may also be needed to increase the reach to low SES populations. In addition to human guidance, technology itself may offer opportunities for support through persuasive system design features [56], which may be just as effective as human support [57]. Prompts are an example of a feature that may increase adherence [58]. Based on user feedback, we have recently developed an app to supplement the CDMIs by providing motivational quotes, tips, and prompts to use the CDMIs. Recent advances in mHealth provide opportunities for systems to learn about their user and offer meaningful personalized interventions when they are necessary and, thus, potentially offering more sophisticated technology-based support with or without human support (eg, [59]). It is likely that such personalized interventions will contribute to adherence and ultimately to effectiveness, and it would be interesting to explore this avenue more in future research. A focus on research questions addressing the use and mechanisms of change in online interventions would be a fruitful next step. This is also in line with calls to pay more attention to the evaluation of intervention components rather than intervention packages in alternative research designs to traditional RCTs as a means to better tie in with the rapid and flexible nature of e-mental health development [60,61]. With respect to the CDMIs, as noted by one of the anonymous reviewers of this paper, it may be worthwhile in the future to investigate the effect of user choice. To this end, a comparison could be made between persons who are able to choose their modules and exercises versus those who are restricted to a more traditional approach in which participants have to go through modules sequentially. Also gaining more insight into the optimal amount of time, exercises, or modules that are needed, and the relationship with user characteristics would be valuable to better personalize interventions in the future. Currently, participants of the CDMIs are advised to spend 2 to 3 hours a week for a period of at least 4 weeks. However, a recent study of Bunge et al [62] showed that even a brief, unsupported Internet intervention of 5 to 10 minutes improved depression scores at 1-week follow-up. Finally, future research should focus on gaining insights into the most optimal strategies for reaching and engaging low SES populations in (preventive) interventions targeting psychological complaints, such as the CDMIs. In conclusion, the online CDMIs were successful in significantly reducing depressive complaints and had an effect on, albeit to a lesser extent, sleep problems, worry, anxiety, and well-being. The intervention did not significantly reduce stress complaints. This study shows that a purely online self-help intervention can have a positive impact on mental health outcomes. Future research should focus on which specific strategies may boost adherence, and increase the reach of the CDMIs among people with low SES.
