Method Participants Participants were recruited from four high schools in the Australian Capital Territory (ACT). The participants consisted of 709 students from Years 8, 9, and 10. Of the 709 returned surveys, 17 (2.4%) were excluded due to large amounts of missing data, leaving a total of 692 participants. Of these, 464 were male and 228 were female. Ages ranged from 13 to 16 years (M = 14.73, SD = 0.87).
Measures The research was conducted using a self-report questionnaire that consisted of demographic questions including sex, age, and availability of access to the Internet at home and school. All other measures are described below. Main reason for using the Internet. Participants were asked to tick their main reason for using the Internet. Eleven options were provided: IMs, e-mail, chatting (in chat rooms), homework tasks, downloading music and/or videos, downloading and/or playing games, health and body, dating and relationships, TV and movie shows and/or stars, help seeking, and other. Frequency of Internet use. Frequency of Internet use was measured by asking participants how many times they would go on the Internet "in an average week." Responses were coded as low (never to once or twice weekly), medium (approximately 3-5 times per week), or high (every day or more). Age group. Two age groups were created, with 13-year-olds and 14-year-olds classified as younger teens and 15-year-olds and 16-year-olds as older teens. Parental use of blocks or filters. Participants were asked "To your knowledge have your parents/guardians put any blocks or filters on your Internet access?" Response options were yes or no. Internet safety discussions between parents and teens. This was measured by one item that asked "Do your parents/guardians discuss Internet safety with you?" Response options were no, occasionally, and often. Due to the very small number of respondents who answered often, a dichotomous yes or no variable was created, with both the occasionally and often responses recoded as yes.
Exposure to inappropriate material or behaviors online (exposure). Exposure was measured by six items that assessed how frequently participants were being exposed to sexual and violent material and behaviors online. Participants were required to indicate the frequency of their exposure to pornography, violent images, bullying, rude comments, sexual comments, and other offensive material. Responses were recorded on a 4-point Likerttype scale, ranging from 1 (never) to 4 (frequently). The mean of the six items was used. This produced scores ranging from 1 to 4, with higher scores indicating more frequent exposure. This scale achieved a reliability coefficient alpha of .83. Participants were also asked what they would usually do if they were exposed to something upsetting online. Six response options were offered: exit the site, log off, block the sender, tell a parent/guardian, tell a friend, and other. Online safety practices. Online safety practices were measured by four items that assessed the degree to which participants were potentially vulnerable to the grooming process of online predators. Items included "I think it's OK to give out your password to someone you've only met online" and "I think it's OK to accept a gift or picture sent through the regular mail from someone you've only met online." Responses were recorded on a 4-point Likert-type scale ranging from 1 (strongly disagree) to 4 (strongly agree). A total score was calculated by averaging the scores for the four items. Possible scores ranged from 1 to 4, with higher scores indicating poorer online safety practices. Coefficient alpha for the scale was .67.
Procedure Approval to conduct the research was obtained from the university's ethics committee and the local department of education. Four schools were approached and all four schools agreed to participate. Due to the time involved in completing the survey, some schools did not involve all classes in Years 8, 9, and 10. An information sheet and consent form were sent home to parents, and the students' consent was also required for participation in the research. The questionnaire was administered by classroom teachers in each of the participating schools. Teachers were provided with standardized written instructions for the administration of the survey, which was conducted during normal class times.
