METHOD Participants Women being treated for HIV who were 18 years of age or older (M = 38.5, SD = 8.2) and using a combination therapy were recruited into the study and randomly assigned to the future writing group or the no-writing control group. Of 47 patients approached, 44 patients (94%) agreed to participate. Of the 44 patients who participated, 21 were randomly assigned to the writing intervention and 23 were randomly assigned to the no-writing control group. Three participants from the control group and 1 participant from the intervention group were lost to follow up (9%), resulting in a final sample of 40 participants (with 20 participants in each group). Participants were African American (40%), Hispanic (35%), and White (25%), and this ethnic breakdown was similar to the breakdown at the clinic from which they were sampled. Sixty percent of the participants in the study had been diagnosed with AIDS.
Procedure Potential participants were approached by a researcher and were invited to participate in the study. Participants gave consent according to institutional and American Psychological Association guidelines. They were randomly assigned to experimental conditions and then completed the baseline assessments. After completing the assessments, participants in the writing intervention selected a blank journal from a variety of different journals. Because HIV patients are likely facing serious illness in the future, to avoid inadvertently causing them to focus exclusively on a negative future, participants were instructed to write about a somewhat positive future. They were given the following instructions regarding what to write about: You should write about a future in which you only have to take one pill each day for your HIV. When you sit down to write in the journal, I want you to think very hard about that future. What will that future be like? In what ways will that time be different than now? Think very hard about that future time, which is probably not so very far off. And then write about that time. Every day you can write about different aspects of that time. Or you can even repeat things if you need to. The important thing is that when you sit down for your ten minutes of writing, you should think for a little while about that time, so that it is clear in your head and fresh in your mind. And then write. It should be noted that a future in which HIV-infected individuals would only have to take one pill per day is not an outrageous expectation. A single medication combining two nucleoside analogues (AZT and 3TC) already exists (Combivir), and a combination therapy regimen involving that medication currently only requires four pills per day. Of course,
Volume 23, Number 1, 2001 the fewer pills per day a regimen requires, the more important complete adherence becomes. The writing instructions (presented in bullet form) were also pasted inside the front cover of every journal, and participants were encouraged to consult them every time they wrote. Participants were told to write two times each week for 4 weeks, for at least 10 min each time. They were told that they should not worry about grammar and spelling and that they should write in any form they liked (e.g., lists, stories, poems) and in any language they chose. In addition, they were informed that the researchers would keep a copy of their writing (separated from their name and other identifying information). Participants were paid $5 for each journal entry, up to a maximum of eight entries, and were sent five postcards (evenly spaced throughout the 4 weeks) reminding them to write in their journals. The postcards each contained the standard message, "Please remember to write in your journal." After explaining these instructions, the researcher asked each participant to write her first journal entry at the clinic and then left each participant alone to write. This technique was used to help make participants feel comfortable writing by "breaking the ice" and to illustrate how easy it was to write for 10 min. Participants in the control group neither were asked to write in journals nor were told to imagine an optimistic future in which they would only have to take one pill per day for HIV. However, efforts were made to equalize the amount of time that researchers spent with participants in the two conditions. Because participants in the writing condition were alone during the 10 min of writing, the only time discrepancy resulted from the 1 to 2 min of additional instructions those participants received. Efforts were made to spend an additional 1 to 2 min with control participants by going over the instructions and consent materials with them at a slightly slower pace. At the end of their first session, all participants made a follow-up appointment for 1 month later and then were sent a reminder postcard about that session. To separate the intervention from the assessment, the follow-up session was scheduled for 3 days after participants received their final reminder postcard, and hence, each participant's final journal entry should have been written approximately 3 days before the follow-up session. At the follow-up appointment, all participants completed the assessments again, and journals were photocopied. All participants were reminded of the importance of adhering to their current medications and were urged to make adherence a priority in their treatment. Participants were then paid for their participation.
Measures Demographic and illness variables. At baseline, participants reported their age, ethnic group, and education level. They also reported when they were diagnosed with HIV and if they were diagnosed with AIDS, and they gave detailed descriptions of their treatment regimen. Optimism. Optimism was measured with the Life Orientation Test (LOT) (1), which assesses generalized positive out-come expectancies. The scale consists of eight items (and four filler items). Respondents indicate the extent to which they agree with each statement on 5-point Likert scales ranging from 1 (strongly agree) to 5 (strongly disagree). The items are summed to create a score ranging from 8 to 40, with higher numbers indicating more optimism. This measure had satisfactory internal consistency (Cronbach's α = .73) in this sample, as measured at the first administration (prior to the intervention). Adherence. Adherence was measured using the general measure of adherence from the RAND Medical Outcomes Study (19). The measure consists of five items that patients respond to on 6-point Likert scales ranging from 1 (none of the time) to 6 (all of the time). The items (e.g., "How often during the last month were you able to do what the doctor told you to do?") assess whether patients followed their doctors' treatment plan over the past month. In addition, because HIV medications must be taken in a strict fashion at particular times of the day, with particular foods (or with no food), three items were added to the measure to assess those specific behaviors. The eight items were averaged to form a measure of adherence (Cronbach's α = .87 in this sample), with higher numbers indicating better adherence. To ensure that participants had an accurate understanding of their physicians' instructions, participants' descriptions of their treatment regimens were compared with the regimen information on their medical charts. Thus, there is no fear that participants described close adherence to an incorrect regimen. Treatment side effects. Levels of distress from side effects of HIV medications were measured with a revised version of the Cohen-Hoberman Inventory of Physical Symptoms (CHIPS) (20). The CHIPS is a list of 39 common physical symptoms. Participants rate each item for how much that problem bothered or distressed them in the past month on a 6-point Likert scale ranging from 0 (didn't have the side effect) to 1 (had it but it didn't bother me at all) to 5 (bothered me extremely). The scale was revised to focus exclusively on common side effects from HIV medications (e.g., nausea, fatigue, kidney stones, dry mouth, etc.), according to package inserts accompanying the medications and interviews with HIV patients and nurses. Journal content. Journals were transcribed and coded by a research assistant who was blind to the study's hypotheses and to the writing instructions that participants were given. A postdoctoral scholar with a focus on qualitative data analysis used line-by-line open coding to identify major ideas or themes that emerged from the participants' journals. Frequently mentioned ideas were grouped into coding categories (e.g., adherence barriers). A description of the themes that emerged is available elsewhere (21).
Analytic Approach To assess whether writing about the future and Time 1 optimism interact to predict Time 2 optimism, a multiple regression was conducted predicting Time 2 optimism from Time 1 opti-mism, writing condition, and the interaction of Time 1 optimism and writing condition. Significant interactions were graphed by inserting the dummy variable representing writing condition into the regression equation for the interaction term and then graphing the two resulting lines (22). Finally, for significant interactions, the difference between the two nonparallel regression lines was tested at (a) a point representing low Time 1 optimism and (b) a point representing high Time 1 optimism. The test statistic used in these analyses is the difference between the points divided by the standard error of the difference, which results in a simple t statistic (23). A similar approach was used to analyze self-reported adherence and distress from side effects at Time 2, controlling for adherence and side effects at Time 1. All variables in the regression analyses were centered before being entered into the equations.
