Methods
Study design The @ktiv trial is a parallel group, cluster randomized controlled trial in the primary care setting with general practices serving as clustering variable. General practitioners from registered practices in three German federal states (Saxony, Saxony-Anhalt, and Thuringia) were invited to take part in the study. Assessments in both the intervention group (IG) and the control group (CG) took place at baseline, after six weeks and after six months.
Recruitment All participating GPs were fully informed about the purpose and procedures of the study and gave their written informed consent before being sequentially allocated to either IG or CG. GPs were provided with test logins for the intervention. In addition, they received written and oral information with regard to the content of the intervention and how to introduce the intervention to their patients by means of an information flyer. GPs informed eligible patients about the study and asked them to take part. The patient sample was comprised of adults (≥ 18 years), being diagnosed with a mild or moderate first or recurrent depressive episode according to ICD-10 (F32.0, F32.1, F33.0, F33.1) and screening positive for mild to moderately severe depressive symptoms according to the nine item Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9 score range: 5-19 points) (Löwe et al., 2004). Other inclusion criteria were German as first language, Internet access and use. Patients were excluded if any of the following criteria was present: severe or persistent depressive disorder F32.3,F33.2,F33.3,F34), organic mental disorders (ICD-10: F00-F09), alcohol or drug dependence (F10-F16, F18, F19), schizophrenia and schizoaffective disorders (F20-F29), bipolar disorders (F31), suicidality, fatal somatic disease (e.g., final stadium of cancer), current grief (due to loss of a beloved person in the recent past), and/or receiving psychotherapy at the time of recruitment. All patients gave written informed consent. Practices that consented to participate were sequentially randomized into one of the two conditions by using a computerized random number generator (allocation ratio 1:1). After randomization practitioners were informed about their condition. The principle investigators and statistician were blinded to the treatment allocation. Given that it is not possible to blind a participant when applying an eHealth intervention (Baker et al., 2010), it was not feasible to blind participants about the intervention they received. Study participants were asked to complete the baseline assessment at the time of recruitment visit before leaving the practice. Follow-up data were collected via postal questionnaires. Three postal reminders were sent in order to increase the proportion of returned patient questionnaires for each assessment point and to avoid a potential dropout (Dillman, 2013). All participants received a monetary incentive of 20 Euros for their participation regardless of the degree to which they participated; GPs received 80 Euros per recruited patient for the additional time and effort involved in the recruitment process.
Interventions
Intervention group Participants in the intervention practices received usual care plus information about and access to the German version of the self-guided cCBT program moodgym (cCBT + TAU). Moodgym is an internet-based, self-management program designed to prevent and alleviate symptoms of depression. It was developed and has been evaluated by the Centre for Mental Health Research (CMHR) of the Australian National University (ANU) (Christensen et al., 2004;Mackinnon et al., 2008;Hickie et al., 2010). The program consists of five interactive modules which are delivered in a specific order: feelings, thoughts, unwarping, destressing, and relationships. Modules include information, animated demonstrations, quizzes and "homework" exercises. Behavioral change is induced by using several cognitive behavioral therapy techniques, such as learning how to identify and challenge negative thought patterns, increasing social and physical activity or inducing problem solving skills. The German version of moodgym was developed by different specialists in mental health care including psychotherapists and psychiatrists at ISAP. Adaptions during the translation process were included to account for German cultural norms. During the trial, German moodgym (version III) was exclusively available for study participants in the intervention group. In Germany, moodgym became available online as a free-of-charge cCBT program in 2016 and was updated to version IV in 2017. The development and delivery of moodgym is now undertaken by e-hub Health Pty Ltd, which is a spin-off company of the Australian National University (ANU). The German version of the program is hosted at a German server and data are completely stored in Germany. During the recruitment visit, GPs gave participants a sealed envelope with all relevant study information and a personal login to the moodgym website. Two weeks after, IG participants received a postal reminder for logging in to the program. Moodgym was implemented in the @ktiv trial as self-management cCBT. GPs supported the use by recommending it as an adjunct element of treatment.
Control group Participants in the control practices were treated as usual (TAU). There were no constraints on the GPs treatment as usual, which allowed e.g. medication, referral for psychotherapy or specialized psychiatric outpatient care and in-patient care, if necessary.
Outcomes
Primary outcomes Self-reported severity of depression, measured by the German-language versions of the Beck Depression Inventory (BDI-II; Hautzinger et al., 2009) and the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9) at six weeks and six months, served as primary outcomes.
Secondary outcomes Self-efficacy and health-related quality of life were assessed as secondary outcomes at six weeks and six months. The former was measured with the six-item Hope and Self-efficacy subscale from the questionnaire for the assessment of empowerment in patients with affective and schizophrenic disorders (EPAS; Kilian et al., 2012). For the latter, we calculated a sum score of the items of the five-level version of the health state classifier EQ-5D of the EuroQol Group (EQ-5D-5L; Hinz et al., 2014).
Other measures Sociodemographic information on gender, age, marital status, and domicile was collected to control for potential confounding variables. We further considered education, vocational qualification, and employment status of the participants. Treatment history for psychological problems including depression, and the existence of a comorbid anxiety disorder (Löwe et al., 2002) were also assessed. The latter was used to screen for symptoms of a comorbid panic disorder (PD) and/or generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) according to ICD-10 criteria. The questionnaire also included items on medication use (yes vs. no) and service utilization (yes vs. no) during follow-up. With regard to the use of moodgym, pseudonymised data regarding uptake and adherence rates were obtained from computer log files. Uptake was defined as accessing the program (yes vs. no). Adherence was determined as level of activity within the program and was categorized into (i) no completed module, (ii) one completed module, and (iii) two or more completed modules (Batterham et al., 2008). In addition, acceptability was assessed with a shortened version of the USE questionnaire (Lund, 2001), including 9 items on the perceived usefulness, ease of use and learning, and satisfaction of the program. Items form a seven-point Likert rating scale ranging from 1 (disagree) to 7 (agree).
Sample size A meta-analysis on the effectiveness of internet-based self-management programs for patients with anxiety and depressive disorders revealed pooled effect sizes of d = 0.24 (fixed-effects analysis) and d = 0.26 (mixed-effects analysis) for interventions without therapist support (Spek et al., 2007). Assuming an average a priori effect size of d = 0.25, an intracluster correlation of 4% (average cluster size 4), and an adjusted alpha level of 0.036 for testing two non-independent primary outcomes (Braun, 1994), we calculated that a total of N = 632 patients (n = 316 patients per group) would be required in order to measure an effect of the intervention on the two primary outcomes with 80% power. Assuming that recruitment would not be homogenous across practices, we aimed to recruit four to six patients within 150 practices.
Missing data Inspection of baseline data revealed missing information on outcome variables and covariates. Missingness ranged from 0.1% (employment status) to 8.0% (panic disorder) and totaled to 19.6% for the overall set of baseline characteristics. Since missingness was not completely at random, complete case analysis was not appropriate. Therefore, we replaced all missing baseline data by using multiple imputation by chained equations (ice routine in Stata) with all sociodemographic, educational, and clinical variables, as well as available baseline assessments of outcome variables as predictors. Pooled estimates of 25 imputed datasets were used for all analyses. Analyses of uptake and adherence to moodgym were based on all participants who were allocated to the treatment arm. Examinations of the utilization of TAU and usability ratings refer to all participants with valid answers in the self-report questionnaire.
Statistical analysis
Intention-to-treat analysis Main analysis of outcome scores was intention-to-treat (ITT), as outlined in the guidelines of the CONSORT statement (Campbell et al., 2012). We utilized multilevel mixed-effects linear regression models to estimate mean differences between the treatment groups in primary and secondary outcome scores six weeks and six months after baseline assessment (Rabe-Hesketh and Skrondal, 2012). Indicators of treatment group (IG vs. CG) and time (6 weeks, 6 months follow-up vs. baseline) as well as an interaction between treatment group and time were introduced as fixed effects in the models; the random part included an intercept to control for heterogeneity between patients. The baseline score of a given outcome was included as covariate to control for possible imbalances between the treatment arms and to counteract regression to the mean (Hayes and Moulton, 2017). The model was further adjusted for the following covariates: age, gender, marital status, education, vocational qualification, employment status, domicile, treatment history and comorbid anxiety disorder. These covariates were considered to be prognostic in relation to the outcomes (European Medicines Agency, 2015). Since we have assessed two primary outcomes at two follow-ups, we used the Bonferroni correction to adjust for multiple testing, resulting in a significance level of p i * = p i * 4 for the BDI-II and the PHQ-9; for the secondary outcomes, a significance level of p < .05 was applied.
Per protocol analysis In addition to ITT analysis as per protocol (PP) analysis was performed, including only IG participants who have actually used the intervention. We used mixed-effects linear regression models for primary and secondary outcome scores on that restricted sample following the same procedure outlined above. Results of the regression analyses are presented as adjusted mean differences in outcome scores between the treatment groups at six weeks and six months follow-up. We further report standard effect sizes of treatment on study outcomes at follow-up (Cohen's d), using the adjusted mean scores obtained from the mixed models. In addition, we calculated the number needed to treat (NNT) in accordance with the methods outlined in da Costa et al. ( 2012), using pre-specified cut-off scores to define remission status: BDI < 9 (Reeves et al., 2012), PHQ-9 < 5 (Schueller et al., 2015), EPAS > 12.1 (scale mean), EQ-5D-5 L > 91.5 (Hinz et al., 2014). Further, rates for remission (BDI-II score of ≤ 9, PHQ-9 score < 5) and response (score decrease of 50% from baseline) are reported with regard to the primary outcomes (Reeves et al., 2012;Schueller et al., 2015). Finally, we used the reliable change index (RCI) to classify whether changes in the individual's primary outcome scores are considered clinically significant (Jacobson and Truax, 1991). In particular, we defined clinically significant deterioration as a reliable change of 1.96 times the measure's RCI in the dysfunctional direction (i.e., increase in outcome score from baseline to post-treatment equivalent to the 95% confidence interval). The calculation relied on the pre-treatment standard deviation and test-retest reliability of the primary outcomes in the trial (BDI-II = 0.90; PHQ-9 = 0.82). All analyses were performed using the Stata 13.1 SE software package (StataCorp LP, College Station, TX). A clustered sandwich estimator with GP code as clustering variable was used in all models for calculating standard errors.
Ethics approval The trial was approved by the IRBs (Ethics Committees) of the University of Leipzig (reference number 222/14ff) and of the Australian National University (reference number 2013/342). In addition, the data handling protocol for the trial was approved by the Commissioner for Data Privacy of the University of Leipzig (date: 18.12.2013).
