Methodology
Sample A total of 588 male and female students in grades 7 and 8 from an urban (n = 185) and a suburban (n = 403) school responded to the our Survey of Internet Risk and Behavior during a regularly scheduled school activity period. The urban school population was 9 percent Asian American, 7 percent African American, 11 percent Hispanic, and 73 percent Caucasian. The district where the school was located scored 40 percent in reading proficiency, 33 percent in math proficiency, and 27 percent in writing proficiency on a state standardized test. The suburban school district achieved a higher level of proficiency, reaching 74 percent in reading, 67 percent in math, and 57 percent in reading on the state standardized test. The school population was less than 1 percent American Indian, less than 1 percent Asian American, 1 percent African American, 1 percent Hispanic, and 97 percent Caucasian.
Instrumentation The Survey of Internet Risk and Behavior was developed for this study to assess student knowledge and behavior at two schools in a northeast state. The instrument was developed using the literature and expert opinions from two current middle school leaders (not from the schools under investigation). The details of the content, format, validity, and reliability are presented in the following sections. Dimension/item content. The Survey of Internet Risk and Behavior contained thirty-three items. Following the item analysis and data reliability assessment, the findings reported in this article are based on twenty-eight of the original thirty-three items. The first seven investigate the views and experiences of the students with regard to social networking. The remaining items Response format. Students responded to each item by selecting agree, disagree, or don't know. Using a "correct" response grid, each statement received 1 point for the "appropriate" or "correct" response and 0 points for the "incorrect" or "don't know" response. Validity and reliability. Content validity of the survey items was supported through the literature (Franek 2005(Franek /2006;;McKenna 2007;Weaver 2007) and a judgmental review by five middle school teachers. Cronbach's alpha for the respective dimensions was as follows: Knowledge = .84; Bullying Behavior = .72; Internet Usage = .78.
Data Analysis Response percentages for the agree, disagree, and don't know options are presented for all items. For the Knowledge, Bullying Behaviors, and Internet Use dimensions, the overall percent "correct" for the set of items defining the respective dimension is also presented. Items were also ranked within each category based on the percentage of "correct" responses to identify the high and low knowledge or behavior areas.
