Method Participants. Ninety-four clinically stabilized outpatients (63 men, 31 women) of five community-based psychosocial rehabilitation services in Los Angeles were recruited from a larger study investigating neuropsychological and psychophysiological factors as predictors of psychosocial rehabilitation outcome (J.S. Brekke, PL, and M.F. Green, Co-P.L). All five rehabilitation programs have rich clientto-staff ratios and similar psychosocial rehabilitation ideologies, including comprehensive and service-intensive rehabilitative environments that combine a consumer-oriented philosophy with a high push for increased functioning in the areas of social, vocational, and independent living. Informed consent was obtained from each subject using both written materials and verbal description. The mean age of the subjects was 38.7 years (standard deviation [SD] = 9.8), and the mean level of education was 12.1 years (SD = 1.8). Forty-six patients were Caucasian, 27 were African-American, 14 were Latino, and 7 were Asian or other. The mean duration of illness was 13.6 years (SD = 10.4). Of the initial sample, partial data were obtained for 13 patients because these subjects either had missing data at the baseline assessment or dropped out before completion of retesting at 12 months. Hence, the complete sample size for the analyses was 81 (57 men, 24 women). All subjects met the criteria for either schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder, or schizophreniform disorder based on the DSM-FV (American Psychiatric Association 1994) checklist procedure. The diagnoses were confirmed using chart information and reports from clinicians as well as on-site psychiatrists. Raters administering the diagnostic checklist were trained by the Diagnostic and Psychopathology Unit of the University of California, Los Angeles, Intervention Research Center (R.P. Liberman, P.I.)-Subjects were excluded if they had a history of substance use disorder in the past 6 months, had an identifiable neurological disorder, or were less than 18 or over 55 years of age. Eighty-four of the 94 patients were receiving antipsychotic medication at baseline (n = 40 for atypical; n = 44 for conventional). Of the group that received atypical medication, two patients had been switched to conventional and one had been taken off antipsychotic medications at 12 months. Sixteen patients who received conventional antipsychotics had been switched to atypical medications and two were taking no medication 1 year later. Of the patients who were unmedicated at baseline, three were receiving conventional and two were receiving atypical antipsychotic medication at 12 months. Measures and Procedure. Data were collected on three measures of perception of emotion, two psychosocial outcome measures, and psychiatric symptoms at baseline and again at 12 months following psychosocial rehabilitation. For each time point, subjects were tested in two separate sessions that were a median length of 15 days apart. Psychosocial functioning assessments (via face-to-face interviews with the subjects) and clinical ratings of symptoms were conducted in the first session, and measures of emotion perception were administered in the second. For each perception of emotion test, the outcome measure was the total number of correct responses. The tests were administered in the order described below. Psychosocial outcome measures. Psychosocial outcome was assessed using the Strauss and Carpenter Outcome Scale (SCOS; Strauss and Carpenter 1972). This scale contains four discrete dimensions, each of which was rated from 0 (most dysfunction) to 4 (least dysfunction). For the current study, the two dimensions most relevant to functional outcome were used: social contacts and useful employment. For example, useful employment in one's primary role, such as wage earner, student, or housewife, was rated as follows: 0 = no useful work; 1 = employed less than half of the time in the past 6 months; 2 = employed part-time or full-time about half of the time in the past 6 months; 3 = employed more than 3 months but less than continuously in the past 6 months; and 4 = employed continuously in the past 6 months. The Role Functioning Scale (RFS; McPheeters 1984) measures four major domains of subjects' functioning in everyday life: work productivity, independent living/selfcare, relationships with family and spouse, and relationships with friends, each rated on specific anchor points ranging from 1 (severely limited functioning) to 7 (optimal functioning). The RFS has sound psychometric properties (Goodman et al. 1993) and has been widely used in service outcome studies in schizophrenia (e.g., Green and Gracely 1987;Brekke et al. 1997;Brekke and Long 2000). Examples of anchor points for the family relationships component are as follows: 1 = no contact with any family members or severely deviant behaviors within family network; 4 = relationships that are often minimal and fluctuating in quality (contact once a month); and 7 = positive relationships with several family members and assertive contributions to these relationships. Clinical rating scales. Psychiatric symptoms, including psychotic exacerbations, were assessed using the 24-item Brief Psychiatric Rating Scale (BPRS; Ventura et al. 1993). This semistructured interview, with specific anchor points, required approximately 20 minutes to complete. Three scales were derived from the BPRS for use in statistical analyses, which included a measure of positive symptoms (sum of hallucinations and unusual thought content), the conceptual disorganization item, and an index of negative symptoms (sum of blunted affect, emotional withdrawal, and motor retardation). Perception of emotion tests. The Facial Emotion Identification Test (Kerr and Neale 1993) consists of 19 black-and-white still photographs depicting differing facial emotions presented on videotape. After each photograph, the subjects were asked to circle on an answer sheet which one of six emotions (i.e., happy, angry, afraid, sad, surprised, and ashamed) best described the emotion of the photograph. Definitions of these six emo-tions were presented in written form and read aloud to the subjects before testing. For the Voice Emotion Identification Test (Kerr and Neale 1993), subjects were presented 21 sentences of neutral content on audiotape (e.g., "Fish can jump out of the water," "He tossed the bread to the pigeons"). Each sentence was spoken aloud in such a manner as to convey one of the same six emotions used in the Facial Emotion Identification Test. The subjects listened to each sentence and then circled on an answer sheet which of the six emotions best described the speaker's tone of voice. The Videotape Affect Perception Test (Bellack et al. 1996) includes 30 brief scenes from movies and television. At the start of each scene, the subjects were told to attend to a particular character. After viewing each scene, the subjects then selected one of six emotions that best described what that character was feeling.
