METHODS
Sample We collected data from 587 seventh and eighth graders attending schools located in Miami, Florida; Naples, Florida; Palo Alto, California; and Baltimore, Maryland.
Instrument We administered the Child Abuse Prevention Services (CAPS) Middle School Bullying Survey containing 14 items (see Appendix) (the instrument used for this study is herein called the "Middle School Bullying Survey"). This survey was developed by Child Abuse Prevention Services (CAPS) located in Roslyn, New York, in response to its school bully intervention program assessment needs. From 2004 to 2006, CAPS pilottested the survey in two schools and administered the survey in various schools during which it fine-tuned each survey iteration until items ceased to elicit problems from respondents. To CAPS' and our knowledge, the final version of the survey has not been used for research purposes elsewhere. Questions on the Middle School Bullying Survey relate to personal experiences with, and observations of, bullying (including cyberbullying); the degree and frequency of bullying; actions taken as a result of bullying and the reasons behind them; and feelings of safety in school. The school-aged authors of this article agreed this survey sought answers to similar questions they had about students in their own schools. The survey form was on a single page and took approximately five to 10 minutes to complete. All questions were closed-ended with a maximum of five answer choices. For each question, we asked students to select the most appropriate response category. We did not collect any personal identifiers and all respondents remained anonymous.
Procedure In May and June 2006, four seventh, ninth, or eleventh graders (three are authors of this article) administered the Middle School Bullying Survey in their schools. An independent institutional review board (IRB) informed the projectrelated students before they administered the survey that the study protocol met the criteria to be exempt from IRB approval because the survey was anonymous and one that middle school students were not required to take; only those students who agreed to complete the survey would voluntarily participate. Students who chose not to complete the survey were either excused from the classroom or engaged in other schoolwork, as determined by individual teachers. The students also secured permission from CAPS to use its survey. We sought permission from participating school administrators and teachers to administer the survey in a seventh and/or eighth grade classroom(s). See Table 1 for a summary of informed consent procedures, more details on the methods of survey administration, total number of surveys included at each of the four participating schools, and respective school response rates.
Data Analysis One team member manually tallied the survey results on an Excel spreadsheet and another team member cross-checked the data entries to confirm accurate inputting. We calculated descriptive statistics (numbers and proportions) for each demographic variable (gender, grade) and each topic response (bullying and victim experiences). We compared frequencies of responses to topic questions by respondent characteristics (gender, grade, and bullying and victim experiences) using chi-square analysis of cross-tabulations. We considered differences to be statistically significant at the .05 level. Due to the low number of surveys received from some of the participating schools, we were not able to conduct an inter-school analysis.
