METHOD A total of 432 students (193 boys and 239 girls) in grades 7-9 were selected from nine junior high schools from middle class, ethnically diverse communities in Calgary. Schools were randomly selected and only those adolescents with signed consent were permitted to participate. A research assistant administered questionnaires to students in class and informed them that they were not obligated to complete the questionnaire and not to record their names to ensure anonymity. Approximately 15 minutes was required to complete the questionnaire.
Measures The authors developed a 15-item survey to address the purpose of this study (see Appendix). These items are based on the first author's experience working in schools, conducting research, and hearing students' disclosures of cyberharassment. A definition of harassment developed by Olweus (1996) and frequently used in research was included at the beginning of the survey to clarify its meaning. Open-ended questions asked about the types of technology used to harass students and details about the incidents. Closed-ended questions asked about the frequency of hearing about, experiencing and engaging in cyberharassment, emotional and behavioral responses, and the relation between cyberharassment and other forms of harassment. These responses were rated on a Likert scale from "Never" to "Almost Every Day." The Alpha coefficient of the reliability of the ten items measuring emotional and behavioral responses was .88. 1, students reported being aware of several forms of technology that had been used to harass peers. E-mail or Instant Messaging and the Internet were the most often reported. Specific examples of cyber-harassment were also reported. One student reported hearing of someone sending insults through e-mail to the school principal. Another student indicated that a girl was "dared to take a naked picture and e-mail and post it." In addition, a student reported that a friend received death threats. Only about one third of students (n = 136) indicated they had not heard of any form of cyber-harassment occurring.
