METHOD Participants The sample consisted of 1,416 adolescents living in Cyprus (50.1% girls; aged 11-14 years at the first assessment, M age ¼ 12.89, SD ¼ 0.78). Following approval of the study by the Cyprus Ministry of Education, 13 middle schools were randomly selected (12 public, 1 private) from three of the four school districts (Lefkosia, Larnaca, Lemeso) in Cyprus. After approval of the study by the school boards, students were given an informed consent form for their parents to sign. In the classroom, students were informed about the study and were also informed about their rights as participants. Only students with parental consent were permitted to participate in the study. Group assessments were conducted with questionnaires being administered by trained research assistants. Prior to the first assessment, parental consent was obtained from 1,513 students, and these students completed questionnaires administered during Year 1. At the second assessment one year later, 93.59% (n ¼ 1,416) of the original sample of students participated. Attrition was due to an inability to contact students who had moved away or transferred to a different school. The sample was diverse in terms of parental educational levels (20.1% did not complete high school, 46% had a highschool education, and 33.9% had a university degree) and parental marital status (7.2% of the families consisted of one-parent households).
Measures Psychopathic traits. CU traits were measured with the Inventory of Callous-Unemotional Traits (ICU; Frick, 2004), which is a 24-item selfreport scale. Narcissism (seven items) and impulsivity (five items) were measured with the Antisocial Process Screening Device-Youth report (APSD; Frick & Hare, 2001). All the items were placed on a 4-point scale (from 0 ¼ Not at all true to 3 ¼ Definitely true). The items measuring CU traits (a ¼ .80; e.g., ''I do not show my emotions to others''), narcissism (a ¼ .70; e.g., ''I act charming or nice to get things I want''), and impulsivity (a ¼ .73; e.g., ''I do not plan ahead or I leave things until the last moment'') formed internally consistent scales. Previous research has provided evidence for the validity of the self-reported versions of the ICU and APSD in community and high risk samples in Cyprus, Germany and the USA (Fanti et al., 2009;Kimonis, Frick, Skeem, Marsee, Cruise, Munoz, Aucoin, & Morris, 2008;Munoz & Frick, 2007).
MVE. Participants were asked five questions regarding the average time per week (ranging from 0 to more than 20 hours per week) they spent watching violent television programmes, violent scenes on the internet, violent movies (at home or in movie theatres), and playing violent video games (a ¼ .89). This questionnaire was based on prior work by Funk, Bechtoldt-Baldacci, Pasold, and Baumgartner (2004). Supportive social relations. These were assessed with the Multidimensional Scale of Perceived Social Support (MSPSS; Zimet, Dahlem, Zimet, & Farley, 1988). This instrument was used to measure supportive relationships within three contexts: family (a ¼ .82; e.g., ''I get the emotional support I need from my family''), friend (a ¼ .80; e.g., ''I can count on my friend when things go wrong''), and school (a ¼ .87; e.g., ''The staff at my school provides me the support and encouragement that I need''). The participants respondent on a 4-point scale (from 0 ¼ Not at all true to 3 ¼ Definitely true). Prior work has provided evidence that the MSPSS is a valid and reliable measure of perceived social support during adolescence (Canty-Mitchell & Zimet, 2000). Bullying, victimization, cyberbullying, and cyber-victimization. The Student Survey of Bullying Behaviour-Revised (SSBB-R; Varjas, Meyers, & Hunt, 2006) was administered at Years 1 and 2 to measure school-bullying, school-victimization, cyberbullying and cyber-victimization. Participants indicated whether they had engaged in different types of bullying or how often they experienced different types of victimization on an ordinal scale of: never, once or twice a year, monthly, weekly, or daily. The SSBB-R includes 12 items assessing school-bullying (a ¼ .89; e.g., ''How often do you pick on younger, smaller, less powerful, or less popular kids by hitting or kicking them?''), 12 items assessing school victimization (a ¼ .90; e.g., ''How often do older, bigger, more popular or more powerful kids pick on you by hitting or kicking you?''), four items assessing cyberbullying (a ¼ .86), and four items assessing cyber-victimization (a ¼ .91). To asses cyberbullying and cyber-victimization participants were asked how often they sent or received a threatening or harassing: (1) e-mail; (2) instant message; (3) message in a chat room or social networking sites; and (4) Short Text Message (SMS). Previous research using the SSBB-R successfully measured school-bullying, school-victimization, cyberbullying, and cyber-victimization in community samples of adolescents in Cyprus and the USA (Fanti et al., 2009;Hunt, Meyers, Jarrett, & Neel, 2005;Varjas et al., 2006).
