Participants
Potential participants were those identified as primary caregivers of the hospitalized child by the child life specialist or head nurse on the hematology/oncology floor at a large Midwestern tertiary care children's hospital.
Inclusionary criteria for the caregivers consisted of (1) being the primary caregiver of a hospitalized child or adolescent with a chronic illness, (2) being available to do the writing task for 3 days in the hospital, or agreeing to continue the study at home if discharged earlier than expected, and (3) English literacy.
In order to confirm that the referred participants were primary caregivers, the experimenter asked them to identify the primary caregiver of the hospitalized child.
If they identified themselves as the primary caregiver, then they were eligible for the study.
If they identified themselves and someone else (e.g., spouse, mother), then both were eligible and data from both respondents were used.
One hundred and three potential participants who met the inclusion criteria were approached on the floor from November 2000 to March 2002.
Of those, 72 caregivers agreed to participate.
There were no differences between the hospitalized child of those caregivers who agreed to participate and those that did not on age, gender, or disease.
Of the 72 who agreed to participate, 54 completed all 3 days of writing and the follow-up.
Of those who did not complete the study (n 5 18), 11 did not finish the 3 days of writing and 7 did not return the follow-up.
In almost all cases, those who refused participation or discontinued participation in the hospital claimed that they did not have time or had too much to deal with.
However, there were no significant differences between those who remained in the study and those who dropped out on measures of general mood (e.g., Profile of Mood States [POMS]-Short Form and Brief Mood Rating Scale).
Reasons for those who discontinued after leaving the hospital were more difficult to characterize because many dropped participation by not completing the follow-up and were not reachable after several attempts.
Of the 54 participants, 16 had received a diagnosis for their child during the current hospital admission, while 16 reported that their child was admitted to receive chemotherapy, 15 reported that their child was admitted due to a fever or infection, 6 reported that their child was admitted for a stem cell or bone marrow transplant, 2 reported that their child was admitted for a sickle cell pain crisis, and 5 reported other reasons for admission.
Using the question ''On a scale of 1 to 10, how severe is your child's illness?''
which appeared on the demographic form, the participants identified that the mean severity of their child's illness was 8.74 (range 5 4-10).
The average time since diagnosis for those participants with children with cancer (n 5 42) was about 1 year (11.89 months, range 5 0.25-99 months).
Comparisons of demographic data and child illness between those who completed the study and those who did not, using t-tests and chi-squares, revealed no significant differences between the groups.
Additionally, there were no significant differences between those who dropped out of the study and those who did not.
Demographic information for the final sample of 54 participants is presented in Table I.
