Methods
Ethics Statement and Trial Registration The trial was approved by the Medical Ethics Committee of the VU Medical Centre Amsterdam (registration number 2011.223) and has been registered with the Netherlands Trial Register (NTR2824). We collected written informed consent from all participants.
Design and Sample Size Our study was a randomized clinical trial examining the effects of an Internet-based problem solving therapy with scheduled email guidance before starting face-to-face therapy in outpatient clinics. The control group stayed on the waiting list and received a self-help book but without any form of guidance. The reason for sending this self-help book was to motivate people to participate in the trial. The full study design can be found elsewhere [17]. We made changes to the protocol by not using analysis of covariance for data analysis, but instead using regression analysis. Moreover, we managed to recruit 269 patients instead of the 248 participants as outlined in the protocol.
Recruitment We recruited patients directly after registration for regular face-to-face treatments at the participating outpatient clinics. From December 2011 to August 2013. a total of 828 patients consented to share their contact details with the research team. We screened patients presenting with symptoms of a mood disorder by telephone using the Composite International Diagnostic Interview for presence of a major depressive disorder. Subsequently, we checked other inclusion and exclusion criteria. Baseline measures were administered by phone to eligible patients (N=269). After each inclusion an independent researcher allocated patients to either the intervention group (n=136) or the control group (n=133) using a random allocation sequence stratified by location in blocks of 6, 8, and 10 generated by the independent researcher in the program Random Allocation Software version 2.0 (Informer Technologies, Inc).
Inclusion and Exclusion Criteria To be eligible for this study, participants had to (1) be aged ≥18 years, (2) be waiting for face-to-face treatment at the participating clinics, (3) fulfill the DSM-IV [18] criteria for major depressive disorder as a primary diagnosis, (4) have access to the Internet, and (5) have adequate proficiency in Dutch. Comorbidity other than bipolar or psychotic disorders was allowed. We excluded patients presenting with suicidal ideation from the trial. We also excluded patients who started antidepressant medication, switched type, or changed dosage 12 weeks before or during the first phase of the trial. Patients who were ineligible remained on the waiting list for face-to-face treatment. We temporarily excluded new participants from any outpatient clinic where the waiting time fell below 8 weeks, until that clinic's waiting time for new patients again exceeded 8 weeks. We made this decision so as not to measure the effects of active treatment by the clinic.
Intervention We based the Internet intervention on problem solving therapy using self-examination therapy as a general framework [19]. The intervention's intent is to teach skills that help patients to regain control over their problems. Patients learn to determine what really matters to them (session 1) and learn structured strategies to solve those problems that are related to what matters (sessions 2, 3, and 4). Furthermore, attention is paid to thinking less negatively about the unimportant problems (session 3) and to learn to accept those situations that cannot be changed (session 4). As the intervention had already proven to be effective in community samples in different studies [13,14,20,21], we presented the intervention to the patients as a way to make a head start in their treatment during the waiting time. The intervention has been described in more detail in several other studies [13,14,17]. In brief, it is a short, structured, and highly manualized generic intervention consisting of 5 weekly sessions. Each session contains structured homework assignments on which the participants receive weekly online feedback by a coach. The total amount of time coaches had for responding to each patient's assignment was about 15 to 20 minutes. The feedback was of a nontherapeutic nature and was aimed at helping participants to become familiar with the presented techniques. In the first session, participants were required to determine what is important in their lives. Next to this, they had to make a list of current problems and worries and divide them into 3 categories: (1) not important (ie, not related to the list of important things), (2) important and unsolvable (eg, permanent loss of health or a loved one), or (3) important and solvable. In the second, third, and fourth sessions, participants were offered various coping skills related to each of the categories of problems. The main focus was on adopting a structured 6-step approach when encountering important, solvable problems. This structured approach consisted of identifying the problem; finding solutions; selecting one solution; creating a plan to solve the problem with this solution; executing the plan; and evaluating the plan. The last week of the intervention was reserved for both the reflection on long-term goals and the development of a structure to achieve these goals. Participants could only move on to the next session once they had submitted the exercise in the previous session and when the research team had released feedback on this session. When they did not finish a session, participants received an email from their coach to encourage them to carry on and to offer assistance in case there were specific problems preventing further use of the intervention. During the trial, we migrated the website to an updated version to safeguard participants' data according to Dutch law and to fix defects in website functionality. The content of the platform remained unchanged.
Control Condition To increase participation rates in the control group, this group received a self-help book format without any form of guidance. The book was sent as is, without further instructions. Previous research showed that self-guided interventions resulted in only small effect sizes on levels of depression [7][8][9]. Participants in both conditions already had an appointment for face-to-face treatment at the clinic scheduled after the waitlist period. Waiting times were not affected by participation in this study.
Assessments All outcome measures were administered by phone by trained research assistants at baseline and posttest (8 weeks from randomization). This short interval was to ensure that patients had not started with conventional psychotherapy at the clinics.
Primary Outcome Measure The primary outcome, symptoms of depression, was measured by the Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression scale (CES-D) [22], consisting of 20 items with total scores ranging between 0 and 60. Higher scores indicate higher levels of depression and a score of ≥16 indicates a clinical level of depression. This questionnaire has been tested in various populations and has been found both valid and reliable [23].
Secondary Outcome Measures Secondary outcome measures were symptoms of anxiety, symptoms of insomnia, quality of life, and mastery. We used the Anxiety subscale of the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS-A) to measure symptoms of anxiety. The Anxiety subscale consists of 7 items, with scores ranging from 0 to 21; higher scores indicate higher levels of anxiety. The HADS has been shown to be reliable in Dutch populations [24]. We administered the Insomnia Severity Index questionnaire (ISI) [25] to measure both the concerns associated with the perceived level of insomnia, and symptoms and consequences of insomnia. Each item is rated on a scale of 0 to 4; a higher score indicates more severe insomnia. ISI has been found to be internally consistent and reliable [26]. We used the EuroQol visual analog scale (EQ-5D VAS) [27] to measure the patients' self-rated health. Endpoints (0, 100) are labelled "Best imaginable health state" and "Worst imaginable health state." We measured the amount of perceived control in a person's life by the Pearlin Mastery Scale [28]. The scale consists of 7 distinct items that are rated on a 4-point scale. Higher scores indicate more perceived control; scores range from 7 to 35. The scale has good reliability.
Process Outcome Measures Process outcome measures were adherence, general satisfaction with the treatment, and the Alles Onder Controle (Everything Under Control) satisfaction questionnaire. We defined treatment adherence (0=low adherence, 1=adherence) as completing at least 4 of the 5 lessons within the given time frame of 5 weeks. Participants who completed at least 80% of the Web-based material would have been exposed to the majority of the interventions described in the manual. We defined lesson completion as (1) reading the exercises, (2) doing the exercises, (3) receiving feedback on exercises, and (4) reading the feedback. Participants could move to the next session only when they had completed the exercises and opened the feedback from the coach, which we marked as read. We monitored these data through the intervention platform. Satisfaction with the Internet intervention was measured by the Client Satisfaction Questionnaire-8 (CSQ-8), which consists of 8 questions; each question is scored on a Likert-type scale from 1 to 4 [29]. The questionnaire addresses several elements that contribute to overall service satisfaction and is reported in a single dimension of overall satisfaction. A high internal consistency has been reported [29]. The Alles Onder Controle satisfaction questionnaire was designed specifically to investigate to what degree participants were satisfied with this Internet-based intervention. It includes questions on the number of sessions completed and, if applicable, the reasons for not finishing the course. The questionnaire further researches satisfaction with the separate elements of the intervention, such as the quality of the feedback, the clarity of the website, and the appropriateness of the examples.
Statistical Analysis We examined differences between groups on baseline characteristics by performing chi-square tests for categorical variables and 1-way analysis of variance for continuous variables. Baseline data were available for all participants. We analyzed missing values on the outcome measures in agreement with the intention-to-treat (ITT) principle, as per the CONSORT statement [30]. We used a logistic regression analysis with backward stepwise method to explore whether participants' characteristics could predict missing data at posttest. Missing endpoints at posttest (31.6%, 85/269) were imputed using the multiple imputation function in IBM SPSS Statistics 20 (IBM Corporation), yielding 30 imputations with 30 iterations using the multiple imputation option with predictive mean matching. Predictors for the imputing procedure were pretest and nonmissing posttest scores, age, education level, sex, and randomization status. We calculated the intraclass correlation to examine nonindependence of observations at the outpatient clinic level. We did not deem a multilevel approach for analyzing data to be necessary. Therefore, we preformed linear regression analyses to examine posttreatment differences between the intervention and the control group. The baseline score of the dependent variable was added as a covariate to adjust the outcome for baseline differences. Differences between the intervention and the control condition were denoted by a regression coefficient (B) and 95% CIs. We also expressed the magnitude of the effects as Cohen d effect sizes by dividing the difference in mean scores of the 2 groups by their pooled standard deviation (Xexp-Xctrl/SDpooled). Effect sizes <0.2 are considered to be small, of 0.5 are moderate, and of 0.8 are large [31]. We calculated the effect sizes for all participants (ITT). We performed all analyses on both completer-only data and the imputed file. Furthermore, we performed a per-protocol analysis based on treatment completers (completed ≥4 sessions of the intervention).
