Methods This study was approved by the St Vincent's Hospital Human Research Ethics Committee (HREC/13/SVH/291). The trial was registered with the Australian and New Zealand Clinical Trials registry (ACTRN12613001198718).
Design Study details are reported in the published protocol [24]. Eligible participants were randomly allocated to the iCBT program or the TAU group who received the intervention after a 10-week waiting period. Simple randomization was used (1:1 ratio), and randomization numbers were generated by an independent research assistant using random.org. Group allocation was concealed in sequentially numbered opaque sealed envelopes. All participants provided electronic informed consent before participating.
Eligibility Inclusion criteria included: Australian resident, age 18 years or older, fluent in English, access to a computer and Internet, self-reported diagnosis of T1 or T2 DM, meet criteria for MDD according to telephone-administered diagnostic interview, and provide personal and general practitioner (GP) contact details. Participants were excluded if they had a self-reported diagnosis of bipolar affective disorder, psychotic disorder or substance use disorder, or were taking antipsychotics or benzodiazepines. Participants were excluded if they had commenced CBT in the past month, or changed antidepressant medication in the past 2 months. Participants scoring either <5 (normal range) or >23 (very severe) on the patient health questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9) were excluded, and those identified as being at significant risk of suicide or deliberate self-harm in the telephone risk assessment were also excluded and referred to appropriate treatments.
Setting and Procedure Participants were recruited from September 2013 to June 2015 by advertisements on DM websites, social media, and fliers. Interested applicants applied on the Web via the St Vincent's Hospital, Sydney's Virtual Clinic website, with an email and username, and completed Web-based screening questionnaires. Those who passed the Web-based screening criteria were assessed via telephone to confirm whether they met DSM-IV-TR diagnostic criteria [25] for MDD according to the Mini International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI) Version 5.0.0 [26]. There were no face-to-face components of the study.
Interventions
Internet Cognitive Behavioral Therapy (CBT) The iCBT Program is described in detail elsewhere [24,27] and a demo can be accessed by contacting the corresponding author. In brief, participants completed 6 automated cartoon-style Web-based lessons teaching CBT skills (eg, behavioral activation) over 10 weeks, with a minimum wait-time of 5 days between lessons. Participants downloaded a "homework" document which included practical assignments (eg, thought monitoring) after each lesson, and had access to extra resources, frequently asked questions, and recovery stories of former participants. Automated reminder emails were also sent to participants when lessons became available. Participants in the iCBT group were able to continue to receive usual care from their health services during the intervention period.
Treatment as Usual (TAU) Control Group Participants in the TAU control condition waited 10 weeks to gain access to the iCBT program. During the waiting period, they were able to continue to receive usual care from their health services.
Clinician-Guidance Minimal clinician-assistance was provided to encourage adherence and engagement with the program by trained clinical psychologists with either Masters (LR) or PhD-level (JN) qualifications or psychiatry registrars (TM). Clinicians contacted the patient after lesson 1 and lesson 2 by email or phone to encourage progress. During the remainder of the program, clinician contact was made primarily by email, but if clinically indicated, or if patients' Kessler 10-item psychological distress scale (K-10) or PHQ-9 scores deteriorated significantly, telephone contact was made by the clinician.
Power Calculations With a sample size of 40 participants per group, the study was powered (0.8 power) to detect a medium between-group difference of 0.65 on the primary depression measure at posttreatment (Cronbach alpha set at .05).
Statistical Analyses All analyses were undertaken in Statistical Package for the Social Sciences (SPSS) version 23 (IBM Corp, 2014). ITT linear mixed models analyses were used to account for missing data due to participant dropouts. This approach is appropriate for RCTs with multiple time points [28] and does not assume that the last measurement was stable (an assumption of the the last observation carried forward approach [29]). Linear mixed models were conducted separately for each of the dependent variable (DV) measures, with time, treatment group, and the time by group interaction entered as fixed factors in the model, with a random intercept for subject. For each outcome, an identity covariance structure was specified to model the covariance structure of the random intercept. Initial model building focused on the selection of the most appropriate covariance structure for the residual correlation matrix. Model fit indices and inspection of the variance-covariance matrix supported the selection of the identity covariance structure for each of the outcome measures. The fixed effect of age was added to each of the models. For each outcome measure except for problem areas in diabetes (PAID) scores, the fixed effect of age was not statistically significant and was removed from the model. Chi-square difference testing of the -2 log-likelihoods indicated that the removal of these fixed effects did not decrease model fit for any of the outcome variables, and they were excluded from further analyses. For each group, planned contrasts were used to compare changes within and between groups from baseline to posttreatment (and 3-month follow-up for the iCBT group only). Between-group effect sizes using the pooled standard deviation and adjusted for sample size (Hedges g) were calculated to compare between groups at posttreatment. Within-group effect sizes (Cohen d) were calculated between pre-and posttreatment for both groups, and between pre-and 3-month follow-up for the iCBT group only. Effect sizes of 0.2, 0.5, and 0.8 were considered to be small, moderate, and large respectively in line with Cohen recommendations [30]. To investigate whether there were changes between posttreatment and follow-up for the iCBT group (n=21) for each dependent variable (eg, PHQ-9 scores), linear mixed models were conducted with time entered as a fixed factor and subject as a random intercept.
Reliable Change Reliable change index (RCI) values [31] were calculated for the PHQ-9 scores to determine the proportion of each group who evidenced reliable improvements (or deterioration) between baseline and posttreatment RCI values were calculated using test-retest reliability values of .84 from Kroenke et al (2001). In order to calculate standard error of measurement values, standard deviations were derived from current sample (PHQ-9 pretreatment pooled, SD 5.34). We compared the demographic and clinical characteristics of individuals in the iCBT group who were considered responders (reliable improvements in PHQ-9 scores) and nonresponders (no reliable change in PHQ-9 scores) using independent-samples t tests and chi-square for categorical data.
Completers Versus Noncompleters We also sought to compare the baseline demographic and clinical characteristics of individuals in the iCBT group who completed the entire program versus those who did not complete the program, using independent-samples t test and chi-square for categorical data.
Measurements All measures were Web-based self-report questionnaires, with the exception of the MINI diagnostic interview which was administered by telephone.
Baseline Measures At baseline, sociodemographic and sample characteristics were assessed including DM-and depression-related illness and treatment history.
Primary Outcome Measures The primary outcome measure was the PHQ-9 [32], which is a validated 9-item self-report measure of depression symptom severity over the past 2 weeks. The PHQ-9 contains items answered on a 4-point Likert scale; the total score ranges between 0 and 27 [33]. The PHQ-9 has been validated in diabetes samples [34]. Glycemic control was measured via self-reported HbA1c values. Diabetes-related distress was measured using the PAID [35] questionnaire, a well-validated 20-item measure with a 5-point Likert scale; total scores are multiplied by 1.25 and range from 0 to 100 (with higher scores indicating greater emotional distress). The PAID has demonstrated sensitivity to change [36] and good internal and test-retest reliability [35].
Secondary Outcome Measures The secondary outcome measures included the K-10 [37] for psychological distress; short form 12-item (SF-12) scale to measure of mental well-being (SF-12 MCS) and physical well-being (SF-12 PCS) [38], the generalized anxiety disorder 7-item (GAD-7) [39] for anxiety severity; and the PHQ-15-physical symptoms module for somatic symptom severity [40]. Other measures were also administered as part of the trial, which will be reported elsewhere. These include the relationships questionnaire (to assess attachment style), the alcohol and eating modules of the PHQ, and the fantastic checklist to assess specific lifestyle behaviours such as smoking status and alcohol use.
Treatment Expectancy, Acceptability, and Satisfaction Participants rated their expectancy of benefit from the intervention at baseline, and the acceptability and satisfaction with the program at posttreatment using the treatment credibility or expectancy questionnaire (CEQ) [41].
Diagnostic Status Current DSM-IV MDD diagnosis was assessed with the MINI version 5.0.0 [26] at baseline for both groups, and 3-month follow-up for the iCBT group only. The MINI possesses excellent interrater reliability (k=0.88-1.00) and good concurrent validity with the Composite International Diagnostic Interview (CIDI, World Health Organization, 1990) [42].
Measurement Time-Points Outcomes were assessed at 3 time points: baseline, posttreatment (11 weeks), and 3-month follow-up (for the iCBT group only, as the TAU group received the iCBT program after they completed the posttreatment assessment). The primary outcome measures (PHQ-9, PAID) were also administered at the mid-time point (5 weeks). Finally, the K-10 was administered prior to each lesson in the iCBT group to monitor distress.
