| MATERIALS AND METHODS The trial was conducted in accordance with the CONSORT (Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials) guidelines and its adaptation for Internet-based interventions. 22
| Trial design This was a parallel-group, pragmatic RCT that aimed to evaluate the effects of a novel Internet intervention for PwE, offered adjunctively to CAU. The outcome time point of primary interest was 3 months, and the CAU group was permitted to use the intervention after this time point. Online assessments were also conducted for both groups at 6 and 9 months postrandomization to examine the stability of symptom course and potential improvements beyond the 3-month time point.
| Trial setting and patient recruitment PwE were recruited consecutively via outpatient clinics in epilepsy centers and other hospitals as well as Internet forums, social media (eg, Facebook), and health insurance brochures. PwE were invited to indicate their interest by entering their name and e-mail address at an online study website and were then contacted by a member of the research team with an invitation to complete the baseline online assessment. If the online assessment indicated a preliminary match with inclusion criteria, they were contacted for a telephone interview, which included a diagnostic interview. Participants were recruited between July 2016 and May 2017.
| Randomization and blinding Randomization was performed by the principal investigator (PI; Y.N.) using a computer-generated sequence to generate the allocation sequence. The PI did not have knowledge of participant characteristics prior to performing the randomization, because participants were enrolled by trained research associates. Thus, concealed allocation was ensured. Participants were not blinded with regard to whether they were receiving the intervention.
| Intervention The intervention (termed Emyna) is described in the trial protocol; further details are provided in the online Appendix S1. 21 The intervention name "Emyna" was inspired by the Greek word "amyna," which in English denotes "defense," alluding to the idea that the program might help PwE to defend themselves against some of the adverse emotional effects wrought by epilepsy. In brief, Emyna is a fully automatic Internet intervention that requires no clinician support. It conveys CBT techniques and exercises to PwE and can be accessed over a period of 180 days. We expected that reduction of depressive symptoms should be evident by 3 months, based on previous findings. 19 Program content is presented in interactive "simulated dialogues" in which patients navigate through the program by reading brief text passages or listening to audio recordings and then selecting one of several response options. The intervention can be accessed via a secure, password-protected website on any computer or smartphone with an Internet connection.
| Measures Baseline data as well as 3-, 6-, and 9-month data were collected via a secure, encrypted online survey service, and participants were invited via e-mail to complete the assessments. Participants who did not respond were contacted with brief reminders up to five times.
| Primary outcome Outcome measures are described in detail in the trial protocol. 21 The primary outcome was depressive symptom severity, assessed at the before and after time points with two self-report measures: (1) the PHQ-9 and (2) the Neurological Disorders Depression Inventory for Epilepsy (NDDIE). Whereas the PHQ-9 is a generic self-report measure of depression symptoms, the NDDIE was developed specifically for PwE.
| Sample size An a priori power analysis showed that a sample size of N = 200 would be required to attain 80% power to detect an anticipated effect size of d = 0.5 on the PHQ-9 at month 3, even if attrition was as much as 30%, as in a similar previous trial. 18
| Statistical analyses All outcomes were analyzed according to the intention-totreat (ITT) principle. Per-protocol (PP) analyses included data only from intervention group participants who had registered to use the intervention. Missing data were imputed for ITT and PP analyses at the primary endpoint of 3 months with multiple imputation (100 imputations, 50 iterations) based on sociodemographic data and available outcomes, following current methodological recommendations. 27 The 100 imputation datasets were merged into one pooled dataset. Given that two time points were examined (baseline, 3 months), analyses of covariance (ANCOVA) were used, which are recommended for trials with before and after measurements. 28 In ITT and PP analyses, we examined the effects of group (intervention vs control) while controlling for the baseline levels of each respective variable. To examine the stability of effects, we examined observed means at all time points with t tests. To reduce familywise error due to multiple testing, we applied a P value of 0.01 for these analyses (two-sided). The groups were not expected to differ in outcomes at 6 and 9 months, because control group participants could access the intervention after 3 months. For the primary outcome measure (PHQ-9), we examined clinical significance following established algorithms. 29 Specifically, participants who improved by at least five points between baseline and 3 months and scored below 10 at 3 months were classified as clinically significantly improved. For descriptive purposes, we also computed the proportion of participants whose PHQ-9 scores at 3 months indicated minimal or no (0-4), mild (5-9), moderate (10-14), or severe (≥15) symptoms, and we applied the clinical significance approach of Jacobson and Truax. 30
