Method Method A randomised controlled trial A randomised controlled trial was conducted to compare the effects of was conducted to compare the effects of internet-based cognitive ^behavioural internet-based cognitive ^behavioural therapy with minimal therapist contact therapy with minimal therapist contact (plus participation in a discussion group) (plus participation in a discussion group) with the effects of participation in a with the effects of participation in a discussion group only. discussion group only.
METHOD METHOD The randomised controlled trial compared The randomised controlled trial compared internet-administered self-help, including internet-administered self-help, including minimal therapist contact, with a waiting-minimal therapist contact, with a waitinglist condition consisting of participation in list condition consisting of participation in a moderated discussion group online a moderated discussion group online (Houston (Houston et al et al, 2002). Those in the active, 2002). Those in the active treatment group were also invited to parti-treatment group were also invited to participate in a separate moderated discussion cipate in a separate moderated discussion group. The medical ethics committee in group. The medical ethics committee in Uppsala, Sweden, approved the protocol. Uppsala, Sweden, approved the protocol. Participants were recruited through a Participants were recruited through a press release and subsequent articles in press release and subsequent articles in Swedish newspapers. Information regard-Swedish newspapers. Information regarding the study was given in these articles, ing the study was given in these articles, including the address of a website that pro-including the address of a website that provided general information and instructions vided general information and instructions on how to proceed for participation in the on how to proceed for participation in the study. This included giving informed con-study. This included giving informed consent, which was done by e-mail. On this sent, which was done by e-mail. On this website participants were instructed to website participants were instructed to complete a computerised version of the complete a computerised version of the Composite International Diagnostic Inter-Composite International Diagnostic Interview Short-Form (CIDI-SF; Kessler view Short-Form (CIDI-SF; Kessler et al et al,, 1998). The Swedish version of the instru-1998). The Swedish version of the instrument was developed in a previous study ment was developed in a previous study on panic disorder (Carlbring on panic disorder (Carlbring et al et al, 2001(Carlbring et al et al, ),, 2001)), and the translation into Swedish (with back and the translation into Swedish (with back translation) has been approved by the translation) has been approved by the World Health Organization. Evaluation World Health Organization. Evaluation of CIDI-SF data yields a probability of of CIDI-SF data yields a probability of caseness ranging from 0.0 to 1.0 for the caseness ranging from 0.0 to 1.0 for the disorders of major depression, generalised disorders of major depression, generalised anxiety, specific phobia, social phobia, anxiety, specific phobia, social phobia, agoraphobia, panic attack, obsessive-agoraphobia, panic attack, obsessivecompulsive disorder, alcohol dependence compulsive disorder, alcohol dependence and drug dependence (http://www.who.int/ and drug dependence (http://www.who.int/ msa/cidi/cidisf.htm). The score is interpret-msa/cidi/cidisf.htm). The score is interpreted as the probability that the respondent ed as the probability that the respondent would meet the full diagnostic criteria would meet the full diagnostic criteria if given the complete CIDI. Participants if given the complete CIDI. Participants also completed the Montgomery-Asberg also completed the Montgomery-A ˚sberg Depression Rating Scale -Self-rated Depression Rating Scale -Self-rated (MADRS-S; Montgomery & Asberg, (MADRS-S; Montgomery & A ˚sberg, 1979;Mattila-Evenden 1979;Mattila-Evenden et al et al, 1996) on the, 1996) on the website, and a set of background questions website, and a set of background questions requesting their e-mail address; information requesting their e-mail address; information on their age, gender, the size of town in on their age, gender, the size of town in which they lived, the three first digits of which they lived, the three first digits of their postal code (to obtain an estimate of their postal code (to obtain an estimate of geographical spread within Sweden), geographical spread within Sweden), education, occupation, medication and education, occupation, medication and contacts with healthcare professionals. contacts with healthcare professionals. The following inclusion criteria was The following inclusion criteria was used, based on self-report: used, based on self-report: (a) (a) a probability of 0.55 or more for a probability of 0. Participants were randomised by an Participants were randomised by an independent person (not involved in independent person (not involved in the study or recruitment), who drew the the study or recruitment), who drew the numbers of the (consecutively numbered) numbers of the (consecutively numbered) applicants from a bowl and placed them applicants from a bowl and placed them alternately into one of two separate envel-alternately into one of two separate envelopes, which were handed to the researchers opes, which were handed to the researchers later. Once allocated to treatment or the later. Once allocated to treatment or the control condition, each participant was sent control condition, each participant was sent an e-mail with a log-in user name. On log-an e-mail with a log-in user name. On logging in for the first time, the participants ging in for the first time, the participants were required to fill out the pre-treatment were required to fill out the pre-treatment questionnaires. However, participants were questionnaires. However, participants were not informed about their group status until not informed about their group status until they had completed the questionnaires. they had completed the questionnaires.
Outcome measures Outcome measures The principal outcome measure of de-The principal outcome measure of depression, 1992). The QoLI includes 16 dimensions of life (e.g. health, includes 16 dimensions of life (e.g. health, economy); for each dimension a rating is economy); for each dimension a rating is made regarding importance (scored 0 to 2) made regarding importance (scored 0 to 2) and of how pleased the person is with that and of how pleased the person is with that dimension (scored dimension (scored 7 73 to +3, but with no 3 to +3, but with no 0 alternative). The QoLI has been reported 0 alternative). The QoLI has been reported to have satisfactory reliability and validity to have satisfactory reliability and validity (Frisch (Frisch et al et al, 1992). All outcome measures, 1992). All outcome measures were administered using the internet. were administered using the internet.
Treatment conditions Treatment conditions The cognitive-behavioural self-help treat-The cognitive-behavioural self-help treatment was based on Beck's cognitive ment was based on Beck's cognitive therapy, as presented in numerous sources therapy, as presented in numerous sources (e.g. Burns, 1999), and on behavioural (e.g. Burns, 1999), and on behavioural activation (Lewinsohn activation (Lewinsohn et al et al, 1986;Martell, 1986;Martell et al et al, 2001). The material (presented in, 2001). The material (presented in Swedish) consisted of 89 pages of text, Swedish) consisted of 89 pages of text, divided into five modules: introduction; divided into five modules: introduction; behavioural activation; cognitive restruc-behavioural activation; cognitive restructuring; sleep and physical health; and turing; sleep and physical health; and relapse prevention and future goals. The relapse prevention and future goals. The sleep module was based on a programme sleep module was based on a programme for insomnia (Strom for insomnia (Stro ¨m et al et al, 2004). Each, 2004). Each module ended with a quiz, with questions module ended with a quiz, with questions on the content of the module. Responses on the content of the module. Responses were automatically sent to the therapist, were automatically sent to the therapist, who in turn gave e-mail feedback on the who in turn gave e-mail feedback on the answers and gave the participant access to answers and gave the participant access to the next treatment module within 24 h. the next treatment module within 24 h. Each module was available on the website Each module was available on the website in hypertext markup language (HTML) for-in hypertext markup language (HTML) format. The website was built by JavaServer mat. The website was built by JavaServer Pages (JSP) programming and MySQL Pages (JSP) programming and MySQL databases. The participant could also print databases. The participant could also print each module by first downloading them as each module by first downloading them as rich text format or as portable document rich text format or as portable document format documents (PDFs). The amount of format documents (PDFs). The amount of time advised for completion of all five mod-time advised for completion of all five modules was 8 weeks. However, the mean time ules was 8 weeks. However, the mean time for completion was 10 weeks. The time for completion was 10 weeks. The time spent on each participant for completion spent on each participant for completion of treatment was estimated to be 2 h in of treatment was estimated to be 2 h in total, including screening, responding to e-total, including screening, responding to emails and monitoring the discussion group. mails and monitoring the discussion group. In total 506 messages were sent to the par-In total 506 messages were sent to the participants, which included a few e-mails sent ticipants, which included a few e-mails sent to the control group. to the control group. The discussion groups were separate The discussion groups were separate and differed in their content, since the and differed in their content, since the groups had different topics to discuss. For groups had different topics to discuss. For example, the treatment group could discuss example, the treatment group could discuss the contents of the self-help material, the contents of the self-help material, whereas the control group was more likely whereas the control group was more likely to bring up topics such as sick leave and to bring up topics such as sick leave and the experience of being depressed. All the experience of being depressed. All activity in the discussion groups was activity in the discussion groups was closely monitored, with the possibility of closely monitored, with the possibility of deleting inappropriate postings. However, deleting inappropriate postings. However, this never occurred. In addition, the thera-this never occurred. In addition, the therapists in the study answered some of the pists in the study answered some of the questions posed by members of the discus-questions posed by members of the discussion groups when appropriate, for example sion groups when appropriate, for example questions regarding the website. questions regarding the website. Each time a participant in either group Each time a participant in either group logged on to the website, the MADRS-S logged on to the website, the MADRS-S was automatically administered, with the was automatically administered, with the restriction that at least 7 days had to have restriction that at least 7 days had to have passed since the previous form was com-passed since the previous form was completed. This was done in order to monitor pleted. This was done in order to monitor depression levels -and in particular zest depression levels -and in particular zest for life -on a regular weekly basis. for life -on a regular weekly basis.
Follow-up Follow-up For ethical reasons the control group mem-For ethical reasons the control group members were given access to the treatment bers were given access to the treatment modules after the intervention group had modules after the intervention group had finished their treatment. Participants were finished their treatment. Participants were contacted by e-mail and asked to fill contacted by e-mail and asked to fill in the questionnaires again on the internet in the questionnaires again on the internet 6 months after the treatment had ended. 6 months after the treatment had ended.
Analysis Analysis All randomised participants with follow-All randomised participants with followup data were included in the analyses up data were included in the analyses regardless of how many treatment modules regardless of how many treatment modules they had completed. This could also be they had completed. This could also be referred to as 'intention to treat', as we referred to as 'intention to treat', as we included all those who provided post-included all those who provided posttreatment data. However, for the main treatment data. However, for the main outcome measure we also calculated results outcome measure we also calculated results on a last observation carried forward basis, on a last observation carried forward basis, replacing missing values post-treatment replacing missing values post-treatment with pre-treatment values. Since this pro-with pre-treatment values. Since this procedure assumes that values remain frozen cedure assumes that values remain frozen in time, we did not report this for all in time, we did not report this for all measures. Confidence intervals, analysis of measures. Confidence intervals, analysis of variance and variance and t t-tests were used for outcome -tests were used for outcome analyses. Significance was set at 0.05 and analyses. Significance was set at 0.05 and all tests were two-tailed. Power was esti-all tests were two-tailed. Power was estimated by assuming an effect size (Cohen's mated by assuming an effect size (Cohen's d d, defined as the standardised difference, defined as the standardised difference between groups obtained by calculating between groups obtained by calculating the mean difference and dividing by their the mean difference and dividing by their pooled standard deviation) of 0.80, which pooled standard deviation) of 0.80, which would require 52 participants to obtain a would require 52 participants to obtain a power of 80% with a conventional alpha power of 80% with a conventional alpha level of 0.05. The actual power for the main level of 0.05. The actual power for the main outcome measure with 85 participants was outcome measure with 85 participants was over 95%. over 95%.
