Method Participants Participants were 40 outpatients who met criteria for schizophrenia (n ϭ 30) or schizoaffective disorder (n ϭ 10) according to the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders (4th ed. ; DSM-IV; American Psychiatric Association, 1994) and 40 community volunteers as controls, matched to the individuals with schizophrenia on age, gender, race, handedness (all participants were right-handed), and parental education (see Table 1). Individuals with schizophrenia were recruited through community mental health centers, outpatient treatment programs, and group housing Andreasen, 1983b] or the Scale for the Assessment of Negative Symptoms [SANS; Andreasen, 1983a]; p Ͻ .01). However, individuals with schizophrenia did not differ from controls on age, gender, or parental education (see Table 1). Informed consent was always obtained before an individual participated in any component of the study. Any participant with current major depressive disorder, as assessed with the Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV (SCID-I; First, Spitzer, Gibbon, & Williams, 1995), was excluded because depression could have influenced task performance. Controls were excluded if they had past or family history of any psychotic disorder. All individuals with schizophrenia were medicated at the time of participation. To determine each participant's diagnosis, a trained master'slevel interviewer used the SCID-I to complete a structured clinical interview. Levels of depression were assessed by having participants complete the Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI-II; Beck, Steer, & Brown, 1996). Control participants underwent an identical diagnostic process. All individuals were assessed clinically with the SANS2 and the SAPS3. In addition, we used the Vocabulary and Matrix Reasoning subtests of the WAIS-III to assess general intellectual functioning (see Table 1).
Materials and Tasks Emotion responsivity. In this paradigm, participants saw a sequence of stimuli (faces or pictures) presented in the center of a computer screen and were asked to make ratings of emotional experience (positive, negative, or neutral) by pushing one of three buttons. Participants were asked to make ratings of experience by pressing 1 if they felt negative, 2 if they felt neutral, and 3 if they felt positive (see Appendix for specific task instructions). For the face stimuli, we used a set of emotional faces developed by the Gur group at the University of Pennsylvania (Gur et al., 2002). These emotional faces are faces that have undergone ratings of valence and intensity of emotional expression by a group of control volunteers. Only faces with Ͼ80% agreement were retained. The face stimuli consisted of a subset of 30 faces-10 faces from each of three categories (positive high arousal, negative high arousal, neutral)-taken from the International Affective Picture System (IAPS; Lang, Bradley, & Cuthbert, 1998). Faces were selected from the IAPS on the basis of the combined female and male valence and arousal ratings for each of the three categories. The order in which participants saw faces and pictures was counterbalanced across participants. Stimuli were presented in a computer-generated random order for each participant. Social cognition. To assess emotion perception (e.g., assessing emotion in others), we used the tasks created by Kerr and Neale (1993), which have good reliability and validity as measures of emotion recognition and perception in schizophrenia (Kee et al., 2003;Mueser et al., 1996). These tasks were (a) a face emotion discrimination task, which consisted of 24 black-and-white photographs of facial emotion from Izard (1971)-four each of hap-piness, sadness, anger, fear, surprise, and shame-in which participants identified whether, in looking at pairs of faces, the faces represented the same or a different emotion by stating either same or different, and (b) a voice emotion discrimination task, which consisted of 35 items that involved 18 neutral-content voiced sentences that expressed happiness, sadness, anger, fear, surprise, and shame and participants had to identify whether a pair of voices were representing the same or a different emotion by stating either same or different. Reliability for the combined items in the face and voice tasks for the study was an alpha of .73. There was a range of 15 for both face and voice discrimination. To assess social perception, we used The Awareness of Social Inference Test (TASIT; McDonald, Flanagan, & Rollins, 2002), which consisted of videotaped vignettes of common social behaviors that assess conversational inference, inferences of others' mental states, and the interpretation of emotional states of others when contextual information is provided. There are three sections in the TASIT, but we used only Sections 2 and 3 because Section 1 was an emotion identification task that overlapped with the Kerr and Neale (1993) tasks described above. Section 2 of the TASIT was the Test of Social Inference-Minimal (SI-M), which assessed conversational understanding through cues such as tone of voice and facial expression; specifically, it tested the individual's understanding of sincere and sarcastic exchanges. There were 15 videotaped vignettes that included sincere and sarcastic exchanges (if the sarcastic exchange were not recognized, the conversation would be nonsensical). After each conversation, participants were asked four types of questions-about what the person in the conversation (a) believed or knew, (b) meant by what he/she said, (c) intended to do in the situation, and (d) felt. The questions were specific about the event in the film clip. For example, one question on a film clip was "Does he believe Cal has finished his dinner?" Section 3 of the TASIT was the Test of Social Inference-Enriched (SI-E), which assessed the ability to use contextual knowledge (visual and verbal) to derive meaning from the conversation. Specifically, the SI-E assessed an individual's ability to understand and differentiate lies from sarcasm. The contextual cues included cues used in the SI-M (facial expression and tone of voice) but also included edited videos (e.g., zooming in on a plate of food) and prologues with a third person to reveal the speakers' true thoughts. There were 16 videotaped vignettes, and in each there was an untrue comment presented as either sarcasm (to amplify the truth) or a lie (to minimize or conceal the truth). The same probe questions that were used in the SI-M were used to assess understanding in the SI-E as well. The TASIT has been used to discriminate healthy individuals from individuals with brain damage (McDonald et al., 2002) and has shown good reliability (McDonald et al., 2002). The reliability of the TASIT for this study was an alpha of .91, and the range was 63. Functional outcome. To assess functional outcome, we used a measure developed in the norming trial of the National Institute of Mental Health's Measurement and Treatment Research to Improve Cognition in Schizophrenia (Green & Nuechterlein, 2004)-a measure that included the modified Social Adjustment Scale (SAS; Subotnik et al., 1997) and the modified Birchwood Social Functioning Scale (SFS; Birchwood, Smith, Cochrane, Wetton, & Copestake, 1990), both of which were administered by a master's-level student during the initial SCID-I interview. The modified versions of the SAS and the SFS assessed functioning in a variety of areas, including work and living situation, social relationships, interests/hobbies, and the ability to care for oneself in terms of hygiene and money management and during severe illness. These measures were chosen because they included items that were important for assessing functional outcome as well as because they easily integrated into our interview and assessment session. Both the SFS and the SAS are well-validated measures of community function (Birchwood et al., 1990;Dickerson, Boronow, Ringel, & Parente, 1999) that have been used with individuals who have schizophrenia. Reliability for the items in this measure for the study was an alpha of .78. The range for the nonstandardized combined functional outcome variables was 265. The composite of these measures after they were z-scored and summed was the variable used in the mediation analysis.
