METHODS
Subjects Subjects were 40 inpatients of the Urology ward of the Policlinico Umberto I, Rome, waiting to undergo resection of a papilloma of the bladder through a transurethral endoscopic procedure. Criteria for inclusion were as follows: education level not inferior to a lower secondary school certificate (8 years of education), to ensure writing capacities; specific surgical risk (Goldman index, Ref. 26) equal to 0, which indicates the total absence of chronic diseases that might influence the postoperative course; and age not higher than 65. Features of the actual group were as follows: 32 males (80%) and 8 females (20%); mean age, 55.75 years; mean years of education, 10.38; 30 married (75%), 3 single (7.5%), 3 divorced (7.5%), and 4 widowed (10%); and 20 working (50%) and 20 retired. All the above-mentioned variables were evenly distributed in the two writing and nonwriting groups.
Measures General Questionnaire. This questionnaire included sociodemographic information (age, sex, education, occupation, marital status) and information on alcohol, cigarette, and drug use; level of physical exercise; and previous operations of the same kind. Twenty-Item Toronto Alexithymia Scale (TAS-20). On this 20item self-report scale (20), each item is scored from 1 to 5. The scale yields a total alexithymia score and scores for three factors: F1, difficulty identifying feelings; F2, difficulty describing feelings to others; and F3, externally oriented thinking. We used the Italian version of the scale (27). Symptom Check List (SCL-90). On this 90-item self-report scale, each item represents a physical or psychic symptom and is scored from 1 to 5 depending on its presence and frequency in the last week (28). The scale was used in its Italian version (29) to assess the level of distress experienced by the patient during the period of hospitalization. Postoperative course record. This was taken on a specific form developed for this investigation and included general clinical data (days of stay in hospital, alterations in electrocardiogram, temperature, pressure or hematological data, days until resumption of mouth feeding) and a series of data specific for urological patients (number of days of bladder lavage, presence of anemia and infections, need for transfusion). On the basis of this record the physician in charge gave an overall evaluation of the postoperative course on a fourpoint scale (poor, mediocre, fair, good).
Testing and Writing Procedure Time1: Before the operation. The second day after their admittance to the ward all subjects who met the inclusion criteria were asked to participate in a study investigating the experience of a surgical operation through patients' reports. Only five patients (12.5%) among those asked refused to participate. Each subsequent subject was assigned either to the writing or to the nonwriting condition until a total of 20 was reached for each group. Assignment was made in such as way as to ensure the highest possible similarity between the two groups on independent variables such as age, sex, education, occupation, marital status, use of alcohol, cigarettes, and drugs, physical exercise level, and number of previous operations of the same kind. It was also ensured that a subject assigned to the writing condition was never in the same hospital room of a control subject. All participants filled in the General Questionnaire and the TAS-20. Each patient of the writing group wrote for 3 days, 20 minutes a day, in a specific room where quiet and privacy were ensured, about his or her thoughts, emotions, and worries about the operation and the experience of being in hospital. We used the instructions developed by Pennebaker's group (eg, 10 and 30), translated and adapted1 for the specific situation: "For the next 3 days, I would like you to write about your very deepest thoughts and feelings about the operation you are about to undergo. All of your writing will be completely confidential. You may write of your experience with hospital life, of present relationships with your family, with the medical staff and with other patients; you may write of the operation, of what you feel and expect about it; these are only examples. The important thing is that in your writing you really let go and explore your very deepest emotions and thoughts. Do not worry about grammar or about using correct Italian: the only rule is that once you start writing, you go on writing until the end of the time period (20 minutes)." The time between the first writing session and operation ranged from 3 to 4 days. Control subjects stayed in hospital for a similar period, in no case less than 3 days, before the operation. 2 Papilloma resection, as noted above, was performed in all subjects through transurethral endoscopy under epidural anesthesia. Time 2: After the operation. The different indexes of the postoperative course (see "Measures") were recorded. On the basis of these data, the physician gave an overall evaluation of the course on a four-point scale. The day before discharge from hospital all 40 patients filled in the SCL-90.
Statistical Analyses Factorial analyses of variance were performed using alexithymia (above/below the median) 3 and group (writing/nonwriting) as independent variables and the different indicators of the postoperative course as dependent variables: days of stay in hospital after the operation, SCL-90 scores, and overall medical evaluation.
