METHOD Participants were recruited through a popular teen Web site (http://www.bolt.com) from August through October 2005. Through a link on the site, youth were invited to respond to a survey designed ''to find out about teens' experiences communicating with one another on the Internet, in school, and using cell phones.'' Participants were informed that we were ''especially interested in things that happen online that are mean or rude.'' To minimize self-selection bias (eg, sampling primarily bullied youth), we did not refer to ''bullying'' or ''cyberbullying.'' Upon completion of the survey, interested participants were entered into a raffle for either an iPod (with lower odds) or a $30 gift certificate to Amazon.com (with higher odds). No parental consent was required because the recruitment took place via the Internet and because the survey was anonymous. We assumed that parental consent would have discouraged participation of individuals concerned about their parents' monitoring their Internet use-the very group that might be most at risk for cyberbullying. Participants were informed that they could refuse to answer any question or withdraw from the study at any time, an act facilitated by the study's online format, in which they could simply log off the study Web page at any point and immediately withdraw from the research without having to explain themselves or be identified in any way.
Sample The analysis sample consisted of one thousand four hundred fifty-four 12-to 17-year-olds (mean = 15.5, SD = 1.47), 75% of whom were female. Sixty-six percent of survey respondents were Caucasian, 12% African American (or African), 9% Mexican American or Latino, and 5% Asian, including Pacific Islanders. All 50 states were represented in the current sample. With the highest proportion from California and New York (102 and 100 respondents, respectively), 30 states contributed 10 or more respondents. Apart from the 4% of participants who were homeschooled, the majority of schools attended by participants were public (84%) and served communities in which, according to participants, most or all students had home access to the Internet (94%). Only 6% (n = 92) of participants who did not complete the survey finished prior to reaching any questions concerning bullying experiences. This group did not differ from the analysis sample on any demographic variables and was excluded from the final sample of 1454 participants.
Measures Online Experience and Communication Tool Use. To be able to control for any possible differences based on history of online experiences, we asked respondents to indicate on a 5-point scale how long they have used the Internet (''6 months'' to ''more than 3 years''). To obtain an estimate of daily Internet use consistent with previous surveys, 23 we also asked participants how long they spent online the day prior to completing the survey on a 6-point scale (response options ranged from ''did not go online'' to ''more than four hours''). Using a 5-point scale ranging from ''never'' to ''every day,'' participants indicated how often they use the following electronic communication tools: e-mail, IM, chat rooms, blogs (ie, online journals or opinion pages that are available for others to read), personal profile Web sites (eg, Myspace.com), message boards (ie, asynchronous text-based dialogue about specific topics), cell phones (through which text messages and pictures may be sent), and Webcams (devices that can record and broadcast both still pictures and video). Bullying Experiences. Rather than use the term bullying (with its potentially narrow connotations), we referred to mean things defined as ''anything that someone does that upsets or offends someone else,'' including name-calling, threats, sending embarrassing/ private pictures, and sharing private information without permission. The types of experiences assessed were based on adolescent focus groups and research on bullying with middle and high school students. 24 Certain forms of in-school bullying, such as physical attacks, were not included in the survey because they are less common among adolescents than among younger children and do not correspond directly to online experiences. Specifically, youth reported how frequently they had experienced name-calling or insults, threats, spreading of embarrassing or private pictures, sharing of private communications (also known online as ''copy-and-pasting,'' as in when the contents of a private IM conversation are copied and forwarded to multiple others), and password theft (eg, gaining access to one's e-mail or IM account without permission). By relying on a 5-point scale ranging from ''never'' to ''more than 12 times,'' participants were asked separately about corresponding school-based (ie, ''off-line'') and online incidents, a total of 9 questions. In order to reduce response bias and confusion, questions concerning online experiences were separated as much as possible from those concerning in-school experiences. Additionally, respondents reported whether they encountered online mean things via e-mail, IM, cell phone text messaging, in a chat room, blog, personal profile site, and/or message boards; multiple responses were allowed. Assumptions About Cyberbullying. To test the assumption that cyberbullying is especially detrimental to the psychological well-being of youth, we examined the association between experiences of online intimidation and social anxiety when taking into account school-based bullying experiences. Social anxiety was assessed with 6 items (eg, ''I worry what others think about me'') from a scale (a =.84) developed for use with adolescents. 25 To test the anonymity assumption, respondents rated their degree of certainty about the identity of the person who had bullied them online using a 5-point scale ranging from ''not at all'' to ''totally sure.'' In addition, they rated whether they knew the person or people involved from school, offline but not school (eg, from after-school activities, camps, neighborhood) and online only, or whether they did not know the perpetrator. Participants also indicated whether they ''did something to get even'' or ''got back at them so they'd leave me alone'' in response to being bullied and, if so, whether they had retaliated online, off-line (ie, in school or elsewhere in person), or both. 9 Youth were also asked whether they usually told adults when they were bullied online and, if not, why not. Answer choices included concern over parental restrictions concerning Internet use as well as a belief in need to learn to deal with such incidents themselves. Reliance on Prevention Tactics. Finally, we probed about prevention tactics provided by the technology (ie, blocking someone, sending a warning, switching a screen name, restricting a buddy list to those whom they wish to hear from) that help youth avoid mean messages online. All the above questions allowed respondents to indicate multiple responses. For example, participants might indicate that they had been bullied both by peers at school and by people whom they know only from online or that they had relied on more than 1 prevention tactic.
Data Analysis Because 15-to 17-year-old girls were overrepresented in our sample, participants' Internet use and experience are analyzed by age and sex using chisquare tests. Rates of reported school-based and online bullying incidents and their overlap are also assessed by relying on chi-square statistics. To be able to examine risk factors for repeated cyberbullying, odds ratios are computed through logistic regression analyses. The associations between social anxiety and school-based as well as online bullying are, in turn, tested by relying on hierarchical regression analyses. All other data regarding the types of cyberbullying incidents, electronic communication tools involved, assumptions about cyberbullying, and the respondents' reliance on prevention strategies are summarized in percentages. Gender and age differences are noted only when they are statistically significant.
