PATIENTS AND METHODS Study design. Based on our previous results (30), we calculated that a sample size of 25 per group would be needed to detect a between-group difference of 0.8 at posttreatment on the primary outcomes. Participants were recruited from February to October 2014 from 4 Australian health care organizations. The trial was approved by St. Vincent's Hospital Human Research Ethics Committee (Sydney, Australia), and participants provided electronic informed consent. Participants were included if they were ages ≥50 years, had a self-reported diagnosis of symptomatic knee OA based on radiographic criteria and knee pain on most days (in line with American College of Rheumatology knee OA classification criteria [31]), met criteria for major depressive disorder (MDD) based on the clinician-administered Mini-International Neuropsychiatric Interview (MINI), were fluent in English, and had access to a computer with the internet. Participants were excluded if they met criteria for bipolar, psychotic, or substance dependence disorders, were taking antipsychotics or benzodiazepines, were not on a stable dose of antidepressant medication for at least 2 months, were currently suicidal based on both self-report and diagnostic interview, or were currently receiving CBT for depression. Procedures. Applicants completed online screening questionnaires via the research web site of the Clinic Research Unit for Anxiety and Depression (www.virtualclinic.org.au). Eligible participants were telephoned to determine whether they met diagnostic criteria for MDD, and if criteria were met, participants were randomly allocated to 1 of 2 groups: OA treatment as usual + iCBT for MDD (iCBT group), or the OA TAU control group who received the standard treatment they would receive for OA if they were not participating in the trial. Participants were allocated by simple randomization (1:1 allocation ratio) without any restrictions placed on the sequence (no stratification or blocking was used). Randomization was completed by an independent researcher not involved in the study, and group allocation was concealed in sequentially numbered opaque sealed envelopes. All participants were offered 1 entry into a gift-card drawing following completion of the study. Interventions. The iCBT Sadness Program consists of 6 online lessons representing best practice CBT, as well as regular homework assignments and access to supplementary resources. The Sadness Program has been validated in a number of clinical efficacy and effectiveness trials (28,(32)(33)(34)(35). Each lesson comprises a cartoon narrative in which a character gains mastery over MDD symptoms by learning and implementing CBT skills. Patient queries throughout the program were primarily addressed by e-mail contact. If patients' Kessler-10 (K-10) and/or 9-Item Patient Health
Significance & Innovations • Approximately 1 in 5 adults with osteoarthritis (OA) experience depressed mood. Comorbid depression is associated with increased use of pain medication, reduced treatment benefits, higher health care utilization, and increased burden in OA patients. • Significant barriers prevent access to evidence- based mental health care. • This trial indicates that remotely accessible (internet-delivered) cognitive-behavioral therapy is acceptable and efficacious for older patients with depression and OA. • The benefits extend beyond reduced depressive symptoms, distress, and mental well-being to include improved arthritis-related self-efficacy, pain, stiffness, and physical function. Questionnaire (PHQ-9) scores deteriorated significantly, telephone contact was made by a clinical psychologist. Outcome measurements. Primary outcomes included self-reported depression severity according to the PHQ-9 (36) and general psychological distress according to the K-10 (37). Secondary outcomes included functional health and well-being measured by the physical (PCS) and mental (MCS) health component summary scores of the 12-Item Short Form health survey (SF-12) (38), self-efficacy measured by the Arthritis Self-Efficacy Scale (ASES) (39), and OA-specific pain, stiffness, and physical function according to the Western Ontario and McMaster Universities Osteoarthritis Index (WOMAC) (40). MDD diagnostic status was assessed according to the MINI, version 5.0 (41). At baseline, participants reported on demographic details, medication use, and OA history. All participants completed the PHQ-9 and K-10 at baseline, week 5, week 11 (1 week following iCBT, postintervention end point), and 3-month followup (week 24). The ASES, WOMAC, and SF-12 were administered at baseline, week 11, and 3-month followup. iCBT participants additionally provided a rating about how logical the therapy seemed (where 1 = not at all and 9 = very logical), and how useful they thought the treatment would be in reducing their symptoms of depression (where 1 = not at all and 9 = very useful). Scores on these items were summed to derive a baseline "expectancy of benefit" rating. iCBT group participants completed the K-10 prior to each lesson, and adherence to the lessons was measured. iCBT group participants were asked 1) how satisfied they were that the program taught them the skills to manage depression, and 2) their confidence level in recommending the program to a friend with similar problems (where 1 = not at all, 5 = somewhat, and 9 = very). To assess diagnostic status at 3-month followup, a clinical psychologist blinded to treatment group administered the MINI (41). Additional measures (not reported here) included the Generalized Anxiety Disorder 7, Pain Detect Questionnaire, and Pain Catastrophizing Scale. Statistical analyses. Groups were compared at baseline using t-tests and chi-square analyses where the data consisted of categorical data. Intent-to-treat linear mixed models (accounting for missing data) were conducted for each of the dependent variables, with time, treatment group, and the time by group interaction entered as fixed factors in the model. Planned contrasts compared changes within and between groups from baseline to posttreatment (week 11) and 3-month followup (week 24). Between-group effect sizes using the pooled SD and adjusted for sample size (Hedges g) were calculated to compare between groups at posttreatment and 3-month followup. Within-group effect sizes (Cohen's d) were calculated between pre-and posttreatment and between pre-and 3-month followup for each group. Reliable change index values, using test-retest reliability values of 0.84 (36), were calculated for the PHQ-9 scores to determine the proportion of each group who evidenced reliable improvements (or deterioration) between baseline and followup (42). To calculate SE of measurement values, SDs were derived from the current sample (PHQ-9 pretreatment pooled SD: 4.79).
