Method
Participants and procedure Participants were 67 introductory psychology students at the University of Missouri, 17 men and 50 women, who signed up on-line for the study. 1 Fifty-seven were Caucasian and 10 were African-American, Hispanic, or Asian. Initially, participants attended small-group laboratory sessions in which they completed a mood questionnaire, performed a mental exercise, completed a second mood questionnaire, then rated their motivation to keep engaging in the assigned exercise in the future. Participants also completed on-line surveys approximately 2 weeks later and 4 weeks later, in which they again reported their mood and also rated whether and to what extent they were continuing to perform the exercise. The latter two assessments were later combined to represent the sustained effects of the manipulations.
Exercises Participants were randomly assigned to do one of three exercises. All three exercises were introduced verbally by the experimenter, and were prefaced with the statement: ''In this study we are studying positive mood, and the factors that sustain it. We will assess your moods several times during this semester, to see how they fluctuate. We will also ask you to do something during this time that might affect your mood. This 'something' has already been shown to have significant positive effects on peoples' lives, and we want to further examine its potential.'' As evident from these instructions, we deemed it necessary to inform all participants of the purpose of the exercises (i.e., influencing mood) in order to bolster their commitment to perform them, and to allow us to generalize to naturalistic contexts in which people knowingly adopt new happiness-relevant strategies. Because participants in all three conditions received the same message (despite the fact that we expected the life details exercise to be less effective), this factor cannot confound the results. Gratitude. The ''gratitude'' exercise was based on that of Emmons and McCullough (2003) and was introduced verbally by the experimenter as follows: Let me get more specific. You have been randomly assigned to try to cultivate a sense of gratitude now, and during the next few weeks. ''Cultivate a sense of gratitude'' means that you make an effort to think about the many things in your life, both large and small, that you have to be grateful about. These might include particular supportive relationships, sacrifices or contributions that others have made for you, facts about your life such as your advantages and opportunities, or even gratitude for life itself, and the world that we live in. In all of these cases you are identifying previously unappreciated aspects of your life, for which you can be thankful. You may not have thought about yourself in this way before, but research suggests that doing so can have a strong positive effect on your mood and life satisfaction. So, we'd like to ask you to continue thinking in this way over the next few weeks, following up on the initial writing that you're about to do. These participants (n ¼ 21) then turned to their questionnaires, which instructed them to ''write about the many things in [their] life, both large and small, that [they] have to be grateful about'' and provided the same examples as the verbal introduction. Students were asked to ''outline these reasons in as much detail as [they] can'' in the several blank lines provided. Best possible selves (BPS). The ''best possible selves'' exercise was adapted from King (2001) and introduced verbally as follows: Let me get more specific. You have been randomly assigned to think about your best possible self now, and during the next few weeks. ''Think about your best possible self'' means that you imagine yourself in the future, after everything has gone as well as it possibly could. You have worked hard and succeeded at accomplishing all of your life goals. Think of this as the realization of your life dreams, and of your own best potentials. In all of these cases you are identifying the best possible way that things might turn out in your life, in order to help guide your decisions now. You may not have thought about yourself in this way before, but research suggests that doing so can have a strong positive effect on your mood and life satisfaction. So, we'd like to ask you to continue thinking in this way over the next few weeks, following up on the initial writing that you're about to do. The BPS participants (n ¼ 23) then read almost identical instructions in their questionnaires, which directed them to write about their ''ideal life in the future'' in a blank space of several lines provided immediately below. They were prompted to ''outline [their] 'ideal future life' in as much detail as [they] can.'' Life details. The ''life details'' exercise was a typical control condition and was introduced verbally as follows: Let me get more specific. You have been randomly assigned to pay more attention to the daily details of your life. ''Pay more attention to your life'' means that you take notice of the ordinary details of your life that you wouldn't typically think about. These might include particular classes or meetings you attend, typical interactions with acquaintances, typical thoughts that you have during the day, or your typical schedule as you move through the day. In all of these cases, you may be helped to better identify problem areas in your life, and to take action to change them. You may not have thought about yourself in this way before, but research suggests that doing so can have a strong positive effect on your mood and life satisfaction. So, we'd like to ask you to continue thinking in this way over the next few weeks, following up on the initial writing that you're about to do. As in the other two conditions, these participants (n ¼ 23) reviewed the verbal instructions again typed in their questionnaires. They were then provided with a several line-long blank space and prompted to ''write about [their] typical day, and the kinds of things that happen during it'' and to ''outline [their] typical day in as much detail as [they] can.'' After completing the writing, participants were encouraged to continue doing their exercise, as follows: ''Please keep doing this over the next couple of weeks, as it may provide significant benefits. Please try to do this exercise at least twice during this time.'' However, the consent form and experimenter script made clear that this was merely a suggestion, and not a study requirement.
Measures Affect. To assess affect, we used the Positive and Negative Affect Schedule (PANAS; Watson, Clark, & Tellegen, 1988), which contains 10 items measuring positive affect (PA; excited, enthusiastic) and 10 items measuring negative affect (NA; distressed, upset) on 5-point Likert-type scales. These items were administered four times. Pre-exercise PA and NA scores were computed by averaging the appropriate items from the first mood assessment, and post-exercise PA and NA scores were computed using the items from the second mood assessment. Follow-up PA and NA scores were computed by averaging the scale scores from the third and fourth assessments. Coefficient alphas ranged from 0.87 to 0.93 across these administrations. Self-concordant motivation. To measure participants' initial motivation to continue doing the assigned exercise, we used the methodology developed by Sheldon and colleagues (Sheldon & Elliot, 1999;Sheldon & Houser-Marko, 2001;Sheldon & Kasser, 1995, 1998). SCM is typically assessed by measuring external motivation (acting to please others or for a reward), introjected motivation (acting to avoid guilt and self-recriminations), identified motivation (acting to express important values and beliefs), and intrinsic motivation (acting because it is inherently interesting and enjoyable to do so); these four motivations are aligned along a motivational internalization continuum (Deci & Ryan, 2000). Participants' instructions read: ''People do things for many different reasons. Please rate why you might keep doing this exercise, in terms of each of the following reasons.'' The external motivation item was ''because somebody else wants me to, or because my situation will force me to.'' The introjected item was ''because I would feel ashamed, guilty, or anxious if I don't do it; I will force myself.'' The identified item was ''because I value and identify with doing it; I will do it freely even when it is not enjoyable.'' Lastly, the intrinsic item was ''because I will really enjoy doing it; I will find it to be interesting and challenging.'' As in much past research, an aggregate SCM score was computed by averaging the identified and intrinsic ratings and subtracting the external and introjected ratings (Sheldon & Elliot, 1999;Sheldon & Kasser, 2001; ¼ 0.50). 2 Exercise performance. Continued performance of the assigned exercise 2 weeks after the lab session was assessed with the item ''How many times did you actually do the exercise over the last two weeks?'' Participants typed a number into a text box. These responses ranged from 0 to 12, with a mean of 3.04. Because we expected a performance decline later in the study, exercise performance 4 weeks after the lab session was assessed with a simple dichotomous item: ''Are you still doing the exercise?'' Thirty participants responded ''yes'' and 37 responded ''no.'' These two variables correlated r ¼ 0.38 and were combined after standardization to yield the most reliable measure of sustained exercise performance ( ¼ 0.56), which we will call ''exercise performance.''
