Method
Participants and procedure An online survey was carried out among 1169 Year 11 students in 20 of the 27 secondary schools in the Otago region of NZ; this represented 85% of the 1370 in the sampling frame. To obtain a clear picture of the situation in rural schools, there was some over-sampling of rural students, with a final sample of 378 rural students (from schools with a town population less than 10 000) and 791 urban students. A cluster sample design of classes within schools was used to recruit individual students. Fifty five percent of the participants were female, with an average age of 15.7 AE 0.4 years. The majority (87%) identified as being NZ European and 10% identified as M aori (Tangata Whenua or the indigenous people of NZ). Ethical approval was received from the Otago University Human Ethics Committee. Surveys were administered by LM during class time over the last three terms of the academic year in 2005, and took on average 30 minutes to complete.
Measures Participants reported the frequency with which they themselves had both experienced and carried out each of the following five bullying behaviours ''this year at school'': excluding, physically hurting, teasing/name calling, rumours and texting (Nairn & Smith, 2002). Item responses were on a 4-point scale with 1 ¼ often and 4 ¼ never. Students were also asked ''How often do you feel safe at school?'' with responses dichotomised into ''very often or often'' and ''sometimes, rarely or never'', and ''During the past 30 days, on how many days did you NOT go to school because you felt you would be unsafe at school or on your way to or from school?'' (YRBS -Centre for Disease Control & Prevention, 2003).
Data analysis The distributions for each of the 5 bullying behaviours are described for boys and girls separately. We used survey commands in STATA to obtain correct standard errors to examine gender differences in bullying (Stata Corporation, 2003). STATA reports the association as an F-test rather than c 2 . However to avoid confusion we report the significance of these differences in terms of p-values. Logistic regression models were used to examine the relationship between text bullying and traditional bullying. This seemed appropriate as we were interested in the association between these two forms of bullying. Lastly, we used logistic regression to examine the relationship between text bullying (independent variable), and safety at school (dependent variable), again presupposing that feeling less safe would be an outcome of being text bullied, rather than the reverse. For these analyses the bullying variables were dichotomised as ''sometimes or often'' versus ''never or rarely''.
