Methods Participants Participants were adolescents, aged 12-17, and one parent of each adolescent (92% were mothers). Chart review or physician report indicated that all adolescents were classified with at least mild persistent asthma (i.e., asthma symptom activity at least 2 days per week and nocturnal symptoms at least twice monthly). Exclusion criteria were having only seasonal or exercise-induced asthma, the presence of a serious medical condition other than asthma, and current use of psychotropic medication or participation in counseling or psychotherapy. Adolescents known to have cognitive impairment were excluded because of the intervention's reliance on verbal skills. Two hundred and ten potentially eligible adolescents were identified, but 26 could not be contacted, and four met at least one exclusion criterion. Of the 180 eligible adolescents, 119 families declined to participate or did not complete baseline measures. Thus 61 (33.9% of those eligible) were randomized, and of these, 11 (18.0%) did not complete the writing (three disclosure and three control) or a follow-up assessment (three disclosure and two control). Thus, 50 families (27.8% of those eligible) completed the study. The 11 noncompleters and the 50 completers were similar on demographic, asthma history variables (presence of allergies, controller medication, and hospitalizations), and baseline levels of the outcome measures (all p > .60). Noncompleters came equally from both writing conditions (p = .93), indicating no differential group attrition. The 50 participants (29 girls and 21 boys) averaged 14 years old, 90% were Caucasian, and over half (54%) were from financially well-off families (earning over $75,000 annually). Most (88%) had allergies, 50% had been hospitalized for asthma attacks, and most (90.7%) were taking controller medication for asthma. Regarding asthma severity classification, 40% had mild persistent, 52% had moderate persistent, and 8% had severe persistent asthma.
Procedures We recruited patients from six local asthma/allergy clinics by mailing letters, posting fliers at clinics, and approaching patients in waiting rooms. Recruitment occurred from September 2000 through November 2002, and instructions and assessments were completed at the clinic when possible, although most patients who were recruited via letters were contacted only by telephone and completed all measures at home. Parents and teens provided informed consent or assent to participate; the protocol was approved by each center's institutional review board. Teens completed baseline measures of asthma symptoms, affect, internalizing behavior problems, and functional disability; parents independently completed measures of the teen's internalizing behavior and functional disability. Lung function (spirometry) was tested when possible. The researcher was blind to group assignment during recruitment and baseline assessment. A random numbers table was used to randomize participants to groups separately for each gender. After completing baseline measures, participants were telephoned by a research assistant who reminded them to open an envelope that contained group-specific instructions, writing packets, and pre-or postwriting questions and to begin writing. Adolescents were instructed to write in a private place at home or elsewhere for 15-20 min daily for 3 consecutive days, to rate their mood before and after writing each day, and to rate several aspects of their writing each day. A researcher telephoned each participant during the writing phase to verify or encourage participation. Participants mailed the writings back when completed. Our primary interest was in the effects of disclosure 2 months after writing, so we scheduled a follow-up at that point, and participants completed the same measures as at baseline and at the same location (home or the clinic). Spirometry was tested again for participants who were assessed at clinics. Because attrition increases over time, we also scheduled a 1-month follow-up assessment of the questionnaire measures to increase the chances of obtaining follow-up data. At the start of the study, families were paid $15 for study completion, and this increased to $45 per family when additional funding became available.
Experimental Conditions The instructions for both conditions described the writing exercise as a potential stress management intervention: "to see whether thinking about and writing privately for 3 days about past negative events [or 'how you manage your time'] will reduce stress and therefore improve your mood, general health, and adjustment to having asthma." The detailed instructions for the two conditions were as follows:
Disclosure Group This group (n = 28; 11 boys and 17 girls) received the standard disclosure instructions that are widely used (e.g., Harris et al., 2005;Smyth et al., 1999). Adolescents were instructed to "write continuously for 15 to 20 minutes about a trauma or problem that you may be experiencing right now, or that you experienced at some other time in your life. You can write about anything that you want, but remember that the event you choose should be the one you consider to be the most stressful that you have ever experienced and that is the most important to you. When you write about the event, I want you to let yourself go and touch the deepest feelings and thoughts that you have. In other words, write about what happened and how you felt about it, and how you feel about it now. You should try to write about the same event for 3 consecutive days, but this is not a requirement. Again, ideally, the topic will be one that you have not talked about in detail with others." Participants were instructed not to worry about grammar or spelling.
Control Group This group (n = 22; 10 boys and 12 girls) received "time management" instructions similar to those used in previous studies (Harris et al., 2005;Smyth et al., 1999)
Measures
Mood Participants rated how much they felt five moodscalm, enthusiastic, sad, afraid, and angry-immediately before and after writing on a 1 (not at all) to 7 (a great deal) scale.
Essay Ratings Participants rated how personal and meaningful their writing was, the degree to which they revealed their emotions, and how much they wanted to disclose the topic using the same 7-point scale as above.
Language Analysis Writings were transcribed and analyzed with a software program, the Second Edition, Linguistic Inquiry and Word Count (SLIWC; Pennebaker, Francis, & Booth, 2001). We analyzed indices for the following categories: total word count and the percentage (of the total number of words) indicating positive emotion (e.g., happy and love), negative emotion (e.g., hate and afraid), causation (e.g., because and therefore), and insight (e.g., think and know).
Outcome Measures
Asthma Symptoms The 9-item Asthma Sum Scale (Wahlgren et al., 1997) was used by the adolescent to report both asthma (e.g., wheezing, shortness of breath, and coughing) and nasal or allergy (runny or stuffy nose and sneezing) symptoms during the past 2 weeks on a scale of 0 (none) to 4 (severe); a total score was calculated. The scale's convergent validity has been shown against children's functional status, lung function, and medication use (Wahlgren et al., 1997). This measure was internally consistent in this sample (baseline α = .82).
Positive Affect and Negative Affect These were assessed with the 30-item Positive and Negative Affect Schedule for Children (Laurent et al., 1999). Items were rated from 1 (very slightly or not at all) to 5 (extremely) for affect during the past few weeks and averaged separately for positive affect (PA) and negative affect (NA) measures. This scale has good convergent and discriminant validity (Laurent et al., 1999), and in this sample, alpha at baseline was .94 (PA) and .93 (NA).
Internalizing Behavior Problems This was reported by parents on the Child Behavior Checklist (CBCL) and by youth on the Youth Self Report of the CBCL (Achenbach, 1991). We analyzed the t-scores for the Internalizing Behavior Problems Index, which has excellent reliability and validity as an index of internalizing problems (e.g., anxiety and depression).
Functional Disability This was reported independently by parents and adolescents on the 15-item Functional Disability Inventory (FDI; Walker & Greene, 1991), which assesses difficulty performing various routine behaviors (e.g., walking up stairs, being at school, participating in gym, running, and doing chores) during the last few weeks. Items were rated from 0 (no trouble) to 4 (impossible) and totaled. The FDI was developed to use with youngsters having abdominal problems, it has both concurrent and construct validity (Walker & Greene, 1991). We used the FDI with reference to asthma, and it was internally consistent as reported by both the parent (α = .88) and the adolescent (α = .90). Parent and adolescent FDI scores were significantly correlated with each other at both baseline (r = .38, p = .007) and particularly follow-up (r = .56, p < .001). Thus, in addition to their independent ratings, we developed a single, more reliable measure of functional disability by averaging parent and adolescent ratings into a composite.
Lung Function This was assessed via spirometry conducted at participants' clinics using standard equipment and procedures (American Thoracic Society, 1995). Three flow-volume loops were obtained, and the computer selected the one with best effort for analysis based on the largest forced expiratory volume. As in other studies (Harris et al., 2005;Smyth et al., 1999), we analyzed forced expiratory volume in the first second of exhalation (FEV1), expressed as percent of predicted value. Unfortunately, spirometry was conducted only on participants who were recruited and assessed at clinics and only when it was performed as part of their routine care. Thus, spirometry data were available for only 32 participants (64%; 15 disclosure and 17 control).
Data Analytic Approach Analyses first compared disclosure and control groups on demographics and baseline measures to determine the success of randomization. Next, the effects of disclosure versus control on immediate mood were tested by analyzing change scores (postwriting minus prewriting) for each mood for each day, and then submitting each mood to a 2 (group) × 3 (day) repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA). The primary analyses sought to test the effects of disclosure versus control writing on outcomes at the 2-month follow-up. As anticipated, some families (7 of 50; 14%) provided only 1-month follow-up data. The 1-month outcomes were highly correlated with 2-month outcomes among those who completed both time points (rs > .70, except for PA: r = .64 and NA: r = .48). Thus, we retained all 50 participants and used the most distal follow-up data available (i.e., the 1-month value if the 2-month value was missing). The mean duration until final follow-up was 2.1 months, and we covaried time to follow-up in outcome analyses. Analyses of covariance (ANCOVA) were planned, in which the baseline value of the health measure was covaried. We first tested whether the baseline level of each outcome variable moderated group effects on that outcome. This allowed us to determine whether group effects on outcomes were limited to those with elevated baseline health problems, and simultaneously to test the homogeneity of slopes assumption required for ANCOVA. In these analyses, we entered the time to follow-up, baseline value of the outcome measure, group, and baseline value by group interaction into a regression equation (after centering the baseline value and the group dummy code). The presence of a baseline by group interaction precluded covarying the baseline and required interpreting the interaction, which we did by plotting the values of the outcome for the two groups at low and high (±1 SD) values of the baseline. We also ran regression analyses for each group separately to determine the slopes of the relationship between baseline and follow-up measure. For those health measures that did not interact with group in predicting the follow-up measure, we conducted the ANCOVA. For the primary analyses, we present not only statistical significance but also two measures of clinical significance. First, we present the effect size, partial eta squared (η 2 ), which equals the percentage of outcome variance attributable to the effect of disclosure versus control group. Second, we present the percentage of participants in each group who met a criterion of clinically significant improvement on each outcome measure. We chose as a criterion the requirement that a participant show an improvement of 0.5 of a standard deviation from his or her baseline score, using the baseline standard deviation for that measure from the sample of 50 adolescents. The final set of analyses examined how the disclosure writings' positive and negative emotion, causation, and insight words predicted outcomes. Following Pennebaker et al. (1997), we used two sets of SLIWC indices: the average word use across the 3 days, and the difference over days, calculated as Day 3 values minus Day 1 values (higher difference scores indicate an increase over days). We conducted partial correlations of these linguistic indices with outcome measures at follow-up, controlling for the baseline value and the duration to follow-up. Owing to the small sample size when testing groupbaseline interactions or when presenting correlations between SLIWC variables and outcomes within the disclosure group, we also report marginally significant findings [p < .10 (two-tailed)].
