Method Participants Participants were executives and senior managers from the nursing sector of a major Australian public health service agency who took part in a Leadership Development Program as part of their professional development. Participants' roles were at Director and Senior Managerial level. Fifty individuals attended the workshop. However, due to unexpected changes in work demands, organisational restructuring or sick leave, nine individuals were not able to compete all questionnaires or attend all coaching sessions within the specified timeframe. Data from these individuals has been dropped from the analysis. Forty-one individuals completed all the questionaries and coaching sessions within the specified 8-10-week timeframe (38 females and 3 males, mean age 49.84 years).
Design and procedure The study used a randomised controlled waitlist design with measures at Time 1, Time 2 (10 weeks) and Time 3 (20 weeks). All participants attended a one-half day training workshop and completed the initial (Time 1) measures prior to the commencement of the workshop. Following completion of the measures, participants were randomly assigned to either Group 1 or Group 2. Both quantitative and qualitative measures were used. Table 1 outlines the research design of the study. Initially, a between-subjects design was used, with Group 1 being the Coaching Group and Group 2 acting as a Waitlist Control Group. Once the executive coaching for Group 1 had finished, post-coaching measures for Groups 1 and 2 were taken (Time 2). A within-subjects design was then employed with Group 2 receiving executive coaching. Final measures were taken at Time 3. All participants completed measures at Time 1 and Time 2. Only Group 2 participants completed measures at Time 3.
Overview of the Leadership Program The Leadership Development Program focused on enhancing and developing leadership capability, with the aim of equipping participants to better lead themselves, their staff and their organisations more effectively though a period of substantial organisational change. Specifically, the program aimed to help participants to: (1) Manage and develop staff at a time of limited financial and staffing resources; (2) Develop their leadership skills to meet the current and future needs of health care service delivery; (3) Meet the challenges inherent in a period of substantial organisational change; (4) Develop leadership credibility, professional identity and individual career opportunities. The program consisted of 360-degree feedback on participants' existing leadership styles, one half-day leadership education and training workshop, and four individual executive coaching sessions over an 8-10 week period. The 360-degree feedback process The 360-degree feedback process was designed to raise participants' awareness of their current leadership styles, and to help them further develop constructive leadership styles. The Human Synergistics Life Styles Inventory (LSI; Lafferty, 1989) was used for the 360-degree feedback. The LSI is a widely used assessment inventory which measures 12 thinking styles and behaviours, combining these into three key clusters. The constructive cluster consists of achievement, self-actualising, humanistic-encouraging and affiliative facets. The passive-defensive cluster consists of approval-seeking, conventional thinking, dependant and avoidance facets. Finally, the aggressive-defensive cluster consists of oppositional, power-seeking, competitive and perfectionistic facets. In terms of leadership behaviours, the constructive cluster is synonymous with transformational leadership styles, emphasising the importance of articulating a clear sense of mission and purpose, being intellectually stimulating, providing timely and encouraging feedback, and coaching and mentoring. Because a leader who displays constructive and transformational leadership behaviours is able to enhance transitions by empowering and motivating staff (McDaniel & Stumpf, 1993), the participants in the program were encouraged to focus on selecting goals for coaching that aligned with facets of the constructive cluster of the LSI. In line with best practice for 360-degree assessment procedures (Rogers, Rogers, & Metlay, 2002), participants rated themselves and were also rated by a minimum of five others: peers, direct reports and their own manager.
The Leadership Training Workshop The half-day interactive leadership development workshop prepared participants to begin the development coaching process by providing a detailed overview of all components of the program. The workshop included information about constructive and transformational leadership styles, an introduction to the LSI framework and feedback process, the development of strategies for gaining maximum benefit from the coaching process, and the development of strategies to deal with the difficulties of organisational change. The workshop incorporated group interactions and discussions and goal-setting. Specific reference was made to issues related to readiness to change to prepare participants for their role as coachees.
The executive coaching sessions The coaching sessions were underpinned by a cognitive-behavioural, solution-focused framework (Grant, 2003). This approach posits that goal attainment can be usefully facilitated by understanding the reciprocal relationships between one's thoughts, feelings, behaviour and the environment, and structuring these to best support goal achievement. Incorporating a solution-focused perspective into a cognitive-behavioural approach helps orientate the coaching towards the development of personal strengths and solutionconstruction rather towards than problem analysis. This approach to coaching helps individuals achieve their goals by: (1) identifying desired outcomes, (2) delineating specific goals, (3) enhancing motivation by identifying personal strengths and building selfefficacy, (4) identifying resources and formulating action plans, (5) monitoring and evaluation progress, and (6) modifying action steps (based on evaluation of progress). As shown in Figure 1, the monitor-evaluatemodify steps form a change cycle of self-regulated change (Carver & Scheier, 1998) and this is central to the coaching process. After initial goal setting, the coach's role is to help coachees move through the selfregulation cycle, by helping them develop action plans, and monitor and evaluate their progress between each coaching session. To enhance the goal directed nature of the coaching program, the GROW model (Whitmore, 1992) was used to structure each coaching session. When using the GROW model the session starts by setting a goal for the coaching session. Coach and coachee then explore the current reality, before developing options for action and concluding with specific action steps that help define the way forward. An outline of the GROW model is provided in Table 2. There were four coaching sessions in total, and these were held over an 8-10 week period. There was some additional telephone follow-up between sessions. Coaching sessions were scheduled at 2-3 week intervals. The initial coaching session included a debrief on the 360-degree feedback, the setting of specific goals based on the feedback, and the development of between-session action steps to be undertaken by the coachee. As such feedback can be emotionally disturbing (Rogers et al., 2002), in line with best practice, participants were contacted within 48 hours after the initial session in order to monitor their reactions to the feedback. The coaching was conducted by two experienced professional executive coaches with a combined total of more than 38 years of coaching and organisational change experience. Both coaches held tertiary qualifications in Coaching Psychology.
Measures Both quantitative and qualitative measures were used.
Quantitative measures Goal Attainment Scaling (GAS). Following consultation with stakeholders and participants, a list of seven personalised statements based on the aims of the program were developed. From this list, participants were asked to select two statements that best represented the two goals that they wished to focus on during the program. The seven statements were: Participants then rated their goal/s for perceived difficulty on a 4-point scale (1 ¼ very easy, to 4 ¼ very difficult). They also responded to the question 'up to today, how successful have you been in achieving this goal,' and rated their goal attainment on a scale from 0% (no attainment) to 100% (complete attainment). Goal attainment scores were calculated by multiplying the difficulty rating by the degree of success. Participants also rated the length of time they have been trying to achieve their goals. Such goal attainment scales have been used in prior coaching outcome studies (for discussion on GAS see Spence, 2007). Resilience. Resilience was assessed with an 18-item version of the Cognitive Hardiness Scale (Nowack, 1990). This scale, based on Kobasa's (1979) work, assess the individual's sense of personal control, their propensity to rise to meet challenges, and their commitment to action. The measure is scored on a 5-point Likert-type scale. Nowack (1990) reports an internal consistency of 0.83. Depression, anxiety and stress. The Depression Anxiety and Stress Scale (Lovibond & Lovibond, 1995) was used as a measure of psychopathology. The DASS-21 is comprised of three sub-scales measuring depression, anxiety and stress. Because it is designed to be used with both clinical and non-clinical populations it is a useful assessment tool for coaching. Internal consistency and test-retest reliability have been found to be good (r ¼ 0.71 to 0.81; Brown, Chorpita, Korotitsch, & Barlow, 1997). Workplace Well-being. Workplace well-being was measured with the Workplace Well-being Index which has been found to be a reliable and valid measure (WWBI; Page, 2005). The 16-item WWBI assesses the degree of wellbeing and satisfaction that individuals gain from their work using 'very How can you overcome any barriers? Source: Whitmore (1992); Greene and Grant (2003). dissatisfied' (0) and 'very satisfied' (10) as the scale anchors. The Workplace Well-being Index includes 15 domain-specific items such as 'How satisfied are you with how meaningful your work is?,' 'How satisfied are you with your working conditions?,' 'How satisfied are you with the recognition you receive for good work?,' and one question assessing global workplace satisfaction 'How satisfied are you with your job as a whole?' Cronbach's alpha for this study was 0.91.
Qualitative measures In order to gather data on participants' experience of the program participants were asked to respond to the following questions: . What specific positive benefits (if any) did you gain from participating in this program? . What specific positive outcomes (if any) have flowed into your workplace? The use of an open-question methodology is an important point in this study because it allowed the participants themselves to determine which issues they considered to be of most benefit.
