Method
Participants and procedure Participants were youth with an intellectual disability and/or developmental disorders who were visiting the Herman Broeren School, a school for special education students in the southern province in the Netherlands. The school enrolled 280 students. Students were selected if they had a total IQ level of at least 50 and were able to read the information in the questionnaire. Students who did not have sufficient reading abilities were excluded. A sample of 150 students fulfilled the inclusion criteria. Parents were sent a letter asking permission. Parents of 30 children did not give their permission and these children were excluded. Several children were excluded because of illness or absence. All participants were familiar with cellphones, internet and/or computers. A total of 114 students participated in this study, of whom most (82%) had an intellectual disability or borderline IQ (IQ < 85). IQ scores ranged from 52-118. Eighteen per cent of the participants had an average or above average IQ (total IQ between 85-118) and visited this school because of a developmental disorder and behaviour and emotional problems. Most adolescents (67%) had a diagnosis, such as Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Pervasive Developmental Disorder among others. Most (i.e. 97%) students were born in The Netherlands. Participants were between 12-19 years old and there were more boys (72%) than girls (28%). Selection criteria was a total IQ of at least 50 because a certain reading level was required to complete the questionnaire (see below). Questionnaires (see Instrument) were completed in the students' classroom. During completion both the investigator and teacher were present in the classroom and students were informed about the topic of cyberbullying. They were told that the data would be assessed anonymously. Demographic information of each student was retrieved from his or her personal file.
Questionnaire The questionnaire consisted of four parts. Each part contained several questions (open ended and closed). Questions and response options had been simplified by using language that the students were able to understand. . Part 1. The first part addressed sociodemographic variables (e.g. gender, age, IQ). . Part 2. The second part contained nine questions measuring self-esteem (e.g. 'I think positively about myself', 'I am not good at anything'). These questions were derived from the questionnaire developed by Scholte et al. [14]. Each item could be rated on a 3-point Likert-type scale, with options 'true', 'sometimes true' and 'not true'. A mean item score of self-esteem was calculated, provided that six of the nine questions were scored. . Part 3. This part contained questions on 12 depressive symptoms (e.g. 'I feel happy', 'I am tense and nervous', 'I worry about things'). Each item could be rated on a 3-point Likert scale, with options '(almost) never' (1), 'ometimes' (2) and 'often' (3). A mean item score was calculated provided that eight of the 12 questions had been endorsed by a student. . Part 4. The fifth and largest part of the questionnaire contained questions about the use of cellphones and internet and bullying via these media. Items address type and frequency of bullying and victimization via internet and cellphone and are rated on a 5-point Likert-type scale: 'never' (1), 'once to five times' (2), 'once a month' (3), 'once a week' (4) and 'more times a week' (5). The items were scored for the last 3 months. A mean item score was calculated provided that four of the six questions had been scored by the respondents.
Bullies, victims, bullies/victims and uninvolved students For the purpose of these analyses related to cyberbullying via internet and cyberbullying via cellphone, this study distinguished between four groups of students: the first group consisted only of victims, the second group comprised only students who bullied, the third group consisted of students who were both bully and victim and the fourth group consisted of students who were neither a bully nor a victim. The last group consisted of students who were uninvolved, thus neither a bully nor a victim of cyberbullying. These groups were established on the basis of deviation of scores. Students were allocated to groups if they had at least a score of '3' (occurring once a month) for being a victim, bully, bully/victim and uninvolved.
