METHOD Participants The data for the current study come from a survey distributed in the spring of 2007 to approximately 2,000 students in 30 middle schools (6th through 8th grades) in one of the largest school districts in the United States. Youth were selected to participate in the study if they were enrolled in a district-wide peer conflict class that all middle school students are required to take at some point in their middle school tenure. There was a 96% completion rate from students who were not absent the day the survey was conducted; those who chose not to participate were asked to silently read, study, or work on their school materials. The final sample size totaled 1,963.1 Table 1 reports the demographic characteristics of the sample and population from which it was selected. As expected with the random selection process, the sample matches the larger population fairly closely on these characteristics.
Measures Respondents were asked a variety of questions pertaining to their school, friends, and family. Relevant to the purpose of the current study, they were asked about experiences with bullying and peer harassment, both online and offline, and thoughts about suicide. Specifically, the dependent variable utilized in this study The current analysis utilizes four primary independent variables of interest. First, traditional bullying victimization represents the respondent's experience in the previous 30 days as a victim of 10 different forms of bullying. As noted in Table 2, the measure includes a variety of behaviors representing relatively minor and common forms of bullying (e.g., ''people told lies about me;'' ''I was called mean names'') to more serious and less common forms of bullying (e.g., ''I was threatened or forced to do things I didn't want to do''). The response set for these questions was ''never,'' ''once or twice,'' ''a few times,'' ''many times,'' and ''every day.'' As such, our 10-item summary scale ranges from 0 to 40 (mean ¼ 3.20; standard deviation ¼ 5.24) with higher values representing more experience as a victim of traditional bullying (Cronbach's a ¼ .88). Second, traditional bullying offending represents the respondent's experience in the previous 30 days as an offender of 10 different forms of bullying. The varieties of these bullying behaviors-also ranging from mild to severe in their harm-are reported in Table 2 and included the same response set as the victimization questions. Again, our 10-item summary scale ranges from 0 to 40 (mean ¼ 2.27; standard deviation ¼ 4.38) with higher values representing more experience as a traditional bullying offender (Cronbach's a ¼ .88). Third, cyberbullying victimization represents the respondent's experience in the previous 30 days as a victim of 9 different forms of online aggression (see Table 3). Like the traditional bullying victimization measure, our cyberbullying victimization measure includes a variety of behaviors ranging from relatively minor (e.g., ''I received an upsetting email from someone I didn't know'') to more serious (e.g., ''something was posted online about me that I didn't want others to see''). 2 As above, the five-choice response set ranged from ''never'' to ''every day'' and as a result the 9-item summary scale ranges from 0 to 36 (mean ¼ 1.59; standard deviation ¼ 3.05) with higher values representing more experience as a cyberbullying victim (Cronbach's a ¼ .74). Finally, cyberbullying offending represents the respondent's participation in the previous 30 days with 5 different forms of online aggression (see Table 3). Once again, the same response set was utilized so our 5-item summary scale ranges from 0 to 20 (mean ¼ 1.18; standard deviation ¼ 2.59) with higher values representing more 2 Readers should note from the behaviors selected for our cyberbullying measure that we intended to capture a relatively broad measure of cyberbullying that might better be characterized as ''online harassment.'' That said, given our restriction to repeated incidents, we feel it is appropriate to label these experiences as bullying. Moreover, some may question our decision to include relatively minor behaviors that may not necessarily be considered bullying (such as receiving upsetting emails or having something posted on MySpace that was upsetting). While we can think of examples of such experiences that would fall outside the realm of cyberbullying, we once again sought to explore these issues from a macro-level perspective. This issue is further confounded by the fact that cyberbullying researchers have not settled on an agreed-upon measure. Our results should be interpreted with these considerations in mind. In addition to these primary variables of interest, we also include age, gender, and race in our models to control for any effect these demographic characteristics may have on suicidal ideation. Age is a continuous variable ranging from 10-16 (mean ¼ 12.8; standard deviation ¼ 1.12); Gender was dichotomized into male respondents and female respondents (1 ¼ male, 0 ¼ female); and Race was dichotomized into White and non-White (1 ¼ White; 0 ¼ Black, Asian, Hispanic, multi-racial, or another race).
ANALYTIC STRATEGY Statistical analyses were conducted using SPSS (version 15.0). Descriptive statistics were initially computed to obtain baseline data on suicidal thoughts and behaviors, as well as with bullying and cyberbullying experiences (see Tables 123). To further measure the nature and strength of the relationships among these variables, we estimated a series of ordinary least-squares regression models. These first isolated the effects of the control variables and then examined the effect of experience with various forms of bullying on the suicidal The most commonly reported form of cyberbullying offending was: ''Posted something online about another person to make others laugh'' (23.1%) while the most frequent form of victimization was: ''Received an upsetting email from someone you know'' (18.3%). It is worth noting that the mean scores for all of these bullying scales are relatively low, which indicates a negatively skewed distribution of the scale. The primary purpose of the current study was to determine if experience with peer aggression (i.e., traditional bullying and cyberbullying) was correlated with suicidal thoughts and attempts. Before presenting those results, it is necessary to examine the effect of age, race, and gender on suicidal ideation. As noted in Table 4, race was the only control variable significantly associated with suicidal ideation. More specifically, White respondents scored significantly lower on our suicidal ideation scale than non-Whites. With respect to bullying, all forms were significantly associated with increases in suicidal ideation among sample respondents. That is, youth who experienced traditional bullying or cyberbullying, as either an offender or a victim, scored higher on the suicidal ideation scale than those who had not experienced those two forms of peer aggression. Moreover, it appears that bullying and cyberbullying victimization was a stronger predictor of suicidal thoughts and behaviors than was bullying and cyberbullying offending. In general, however, results suggest that experience with bullying explains only a small amount of the variation in suicidal ideation (only about 6% in the victimization models and 3% in the offending models). Finally, we sought to identify if bullying and cyberbullying experiences were related to an increased likelihood of an adolescent attempting suicide. For this final approach, we dichotomized our bullying and cyberbullying summary scales (those who scored 0 or 1 were coded as ''0'' while those who scored 2 or higher were coded as ''1''). 4 Results of this analysis were similar to the previous results with all forms of peer aggression being associated with a significant increase in the likelihood that the respondent attempted suicide (see Table 5). For example, traditional bullying victims were 1.7 times more likely and traditional bullying offenders were 2.1 times more likely to have attempted suicide than those who were not traditional victims or offenders. Similarly, cyberbullying victims were 1.9 times more likely and cyberbullying offenders were 1.5 times more likely to have attempted suicide than those who were not cyberbullying victims or offenders.
