METHODS The MetroWest Adolescent Health Survey is a biennial census survey of high school students in the western suburbs and small cities of the Boston metropolitan area that has the goal of monitoring trends to inform local and regional school and community policies and practices. The region is home to 26 high schools serving predominantly middle-and upper-middle class families. The survey employs a census rather than sampling procedure so that each district can monitor student behaviors and identify health issues that may vary by grade, gender, and other sociodemographic characteristics. In fall 2008, 22 of 26 high schools in the region participated in the survey; these schools serve 86% of all public high school students in the region. Pencil and paper, anonymous surveys were conducted with all 9th-through 12th-grade students present on the day of administration. Parents and guardians were notified in advance and given the opportunity to view the survey and opt out their child(ren); students also provided assent. Youths (n= 20406) completed the surveys, for a participation rate of 88. 1% (range, 75.2%---93.7%). Reflecting differences in school size, the number of students participating at each site ranged from 303 to 1815.
Measures To facilitate comparison with state and national data, most items in the MetroWest Adolescent Health Survey were drawn from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's Youth Risk Behavior Survey 37 and the Massachusetts Youth Risk Behavior Survey. 38 Bullying. Students were asked about cyberbullying victimization and school bullying victimization in the past 12 months. Cyberbullying was measured with the following question: ''How many times has someone used the Internet, a phone, or other electronic communications to bully, tease, or threaten you?'' School bullying was measured by the following question: ''During the past 12 months, how many times have you been bullied on school property?'' with bullying defined as ''being repeatedly teased, threatened, hit, kicked, or excluded by another student or group of students.'' Responses from these 2 questions were categorically grouped into 4 categories of bullying victimization: cyberbullying victim only, school bullying victim only, both cyber and school bullying victim, and neither. Psychological distress. Depressive symptoms, suicidal ideation (seriously considering suicide), and suicide attempts (any attempt and an attempt requiring medical treatment) were measured using items about behavior in the past 12 months. 37 Self-injury was assessed by the item ''How many times did you hurt or injure yourself on purpose? (For example, by cutting, burning, or bruising yourself on purpose).'' 38 Responses were dichotomized into yes or no categories. Sociodemographics. Sociodemographic characteristics included gender, grade (9---12), race/ethnicity (Asian, African American or Black, Hispanic or Latino, Caucasian or White, or mixed or other), and sexual orientation (responses grouped as ''heterosexually identified'' vs ''nonheterosexually identified,'' the latter of which encompassed gay or lesbian, bisexual, other, and not sure). Individual-level school characteristics. School performance was measured through self-reported grades coded as ''mostly As,'' ''mostly Bs,'' ''mostly Cs,'' and a combined category encompassing ''mostly Ds,'' ''mostly Fs,'' and ungraded or other. School attachment was measured using a 5-item scale from the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health 39 ; scale scores were divided into tertiles (low, medium, high). School size. Schools were grouped into 3 categories on the basis of the size of student enrollment: < 750 students, 750---1250 students, and >1250 students.
Data Analysis We generated descriptive statistics on the prevalence of bullying victimization and psychological distress. We used cross-tabulations to examine bivariate associations of victimization with sociodemographic (gender, grade, race/ethnicity, and sexual orientation), selfreported school performance, and school attachment and psychological distress indicators. We used binomial logistic regression analysis to examine the relationship between bullying victimization and psychological distress, adjusting for sociodemographics, school performance, school attachment, and school enrollment size. Because of the large sample size, we used P values < .01 and 99% confidence intervals (CIs) to identify statistical significance. School size was not associated with victimization or psychological distress indicators and was not included in final regression models. We used SPSS version 18.0 (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL) for all analyses.
