Methods
Intervention To increase the SMA of slightly to moderately frail older people, and influence their subjective well-being, we developed a bibliotherapy, which was called ''GRIP on life''. This bibliotherapy was introduced as a correspondence course on how to maintain a firm grip on life with increasing age. It consisted of five different parts, each composed of 11-19 pages, which were printed one-sided in black and white. For the layout of the text, we hired a graphic design agency with experience in the field of health care interventions (e.g., [24]). The contents of the different parts were all based on the theoretical framework behind SMA [15]. In each part, information about SMA was given, alternated with examples of fictive individuals to illustrate the importance of SMA in daily life. Furthermore, exercises were given to evaluate one's own situation. These exercises first contained the request to list one's activities in a particular domain of physical or social well-being, for example, ''I engage in the following activities to relax . . .'' Blank spaces were left so participants could write down their answers. Next, participants were asked to evaluate whether these activities were satisfactory, for example, ''In your opinion, do you obtain enough relaxation?'' Subsequently, information was offered on how to improve one's SMA in those physical and psychosocial domains that participants were not satisfied with. The core message of this information was repeated in a separate text box. Each part ended with an exercise in which the new abilities could be practiced. To make sure that our target population would perceive the bibliotherapy as clear and relevant, we formed a focus group of older people to evaluate its contents prior to our experiment. In discussions with this target group, we discovered that the part addressing status appeared to be highly susceptible to social desirability. The target group associated the need for status with negative personality characteristics like arrogance and self-display, and were unwilling to engage in exercises aimed at increasing status. Because it was hard at that moment to find a suitable format to address status, this dimension of well-being was omitted from the final version of the bibliotherapy. Part 1 focused on the ability of having a positive frame of mind. We based this part on elements of the Rational Emotive Therapy by Ellis [25]. The participants were asked to list their thoughts, to analyze whether these thoughts were excessively negative, and if so, to replace them with more positive thoughts. In part 2, we addressed the importance of self-efficacy and taking initiative. The importance of goal setting was stressed, and ways were given to overcome the barriers to one's goal, for example, by not making goals too big, by taking small steps, and by trying to have faith in the things one wishes to achieve. Furthermore, the participants were taught to formulate a plan of action [26], which contains a specific description of what one is going to do, and when one is going to do it. Part 3 was about the importance of taking initiative and of self-efficacy with regard to comfort and stimulation. The participants were encouraged to think about new ways of attaining these physical dimensions of well-being. At the end of this part, they formulated an attainable plan of action to actually pursue these goals in the following week. Part 4 focused on the importance of taking initiative and of self-efficacy with regard to affection and behavioural confirmation. Again, the participants were asked to think of ways to attain these social dimensions of well-being, and to follow their plans of action. The fifth, and last, part was about the importance of variety and investment. The participants were asked to think about substitutes for their favourite activities or persons. If substitution was lacking, the participants were encouraged to explore new activities or ways of meeting new people. Multifunctionality was addressed throughout the bibliotherapy by offering examples of how physical and social dimensions of well-being can be combined.
Procedure In August 2001, a questionnaire was sent to a random sample of 3000 community-dwelling older people aged 65 years and older. The addresses of this community sample were randomly drawn from the register of six municipalities in the north of The Netherlands. These municipalities consist of smaller and larger sites and have an individual income comparable to the national mean. All municipalities selected at random the addresses of 500 community-dwelling older people aged 65 years and older. From the 45% of the addressees who returned the questionnaire (N = 1338), a selection was made of respondents who scored slightly to moderately frail (score 1 until 5) on the Groningen Frailty Indicator (GFI; see Section 2). These older people (N = 825) were approached with the request to participate in the intervention. If they were willing to participate, they were asked to return a pretest. Of the persons who were approached, 22% returned the pre-test (N = 193). For purposes of randomisation, these pretests were numbered in the order in which they came in. Subsequently, participants receiving an odd number were assigned to the experimental condition, while participants receiving an even number were assigned to the control condition. The 97 participants that were assigned to the experimental condition received the bibliotherapy right away, while the 96 participants that were assigned to the control condition were told that they were on a waiting list, and would receive the bibliotherapy in 6 months. The experimental group received a new part of the bibliotherapy every 2 weeks. Before they received the following part, they had to return a short questionnaire on the features of SMA that were addressed in the previous part. This was to make sure that participants would actually complete the bibliotherapy, and to get an idea of how they appreciated it. The control group received similar questions concerning features of SMA every so often, to counteract the effects of a possible attention bias and the priming of SMA concepts among the participants in the experimental group. After the participants in the experimental group had finished the bibliotherapy, both groups received the first post-test. Six months after this first post-test had been sent, both groups received the second post-test.
Sample 2.3.1. Experimental group After completion of the pre-test, 97 older people were randomly assigned to the experimental group. Eighty-two percent of these older people completed the bibliotherapy (N = 79). Reasons given for not completing the bibliotherapy were health problems, being too busy, and not perceiving the bibliotherapy as relevant to one's own situation. Forty-two percent of the participants who completed the bibliotherapy was male and 58% was female, which was about the same distribution as in the original sample assigned to the experimental group. The average age of the participants was 72.91 (S.D. = 6.20), the oldest participant being 91 years old. All participants in the experimental group were slightly to moderately frail (score 1 until 5 on the GFI; see Section 2.4), which mainly signified a high level of psychosocial problems, in combination with minor physical problems. Table 1 shows the characteristics of the experimental and the control group on the physical, cognitive and psychosocial dimensions of frailty. All the participants who completed the bibliotherapy returned the first post-test, with 98% also returning the second post-test (N = 77).
Control group After completion of the pre-test, 96 older people were randomly assigned to the control group. Ninety percent of these older people returned the two-weekly questionnaires on features of SMA (N = 86). Reasons given for not returning the questionnaires on SMA were health problems and perceiving the questions as unpleasant. Thirty-five percent of the participants who returned the questionnaires on SMA was male and 64% was female, which was about the same distribution as in the original sample assigned to the control group. The average age of the participants was 73.71 (S.D. = 6.24), the oldest participant being 91 years old. As in the experimental group, participants' level of frailty mainly constituted of a high level of psychosocial problems, in combination with minor physical problems (see Table 1). All the participants who returned the two-weekly questionnaires on SMA also returned the first post-test, with 95% returning the second post-test (N = 82).
Measures
Frailty To determine the levels of frailty of the participants, we used the Groningen Frailty Indicator [27]. This is a simple questionnaire designed to screen older people for beginning physical, cognitive, and psychosocial problems. An example of a physical item is ''Are you able to do your shopping single handed without any help?'' An example of a psychosocial item is ''Do you sometimes miss people around you?'' The GFI consists of 15 items, which can be answered with ''yes'' or ''no''. Additionally, the psychosocial items and an item on memory complaints can be answered with ''sometimes''. Answers indicating a high level of frailty were assigned one point and answers indicating a low level of frailty were assigned zero points. The answer ''sometimes'' was assigned one point for the psychosocial items, and zero points for the item on memory complaints. These points were summed, which resulted in a range from 0 (not frail) to 15 (severely frail). The GFI has shown to be an internally consistent scale with positive indications of construct and clinical validity. The clinical assessment of frailty level by a panel of geriatric experts corresponded with scale-scores on the GFI. These experts considered a GFI-score of 5 or higher as moderately to severely frail [28].
Measure of self-management ability. To measure SMA, we used the Self-Management Ability-Scale [22]. This scale consists of six subscales, one for every aspect of SMA, and each subscale contains five items. The overall scale's internal consistency was 0.90. Within the subscales of taking initiative, investing, self-efficacy, variety, and multifunctionality, the different abilities are related to the physical and social dimensions of well-being described in the social production function theory by Lindenberg [20]. The ability 'having a positive frame of mind' is considered a more general cognitive frame, therefore its subscale is not directly related to specific dimensions of well-being. The average sum score for the SMA-S ranges from 5 to 30, with a higher score meaning higher SMA.
Mastery To measure the more general concept of control, we used the mastery scale by Pearlin and Schooler [23]. This is a brief scale, consisting of seven items (a = 0.74), which measures the amount of control people experience over their lives. Answers could be given on a five-point scale, with a higher score indicating a higher sense of mastery. As expected, this scale was significantly related to the SMA-S, with the Pearson's correlation between both scales ranging from 0.19 up to 0.36 at the different times of measurement (i.e., the pre-test, and the first and the second post-tests).
Subjective well-being To measure overall subjective well-being, we used the 15 item version (a = 0.80) of the SPF-Index Level Scale (SPF-IL [29]). This scale integrates both affective and cognitive components of well-being. It consists of five subscales, each representing one of the dimensions of well-being from the SPF theory [20]. An example of a question for affection is ''Do people pay attention to you?'' Answers could be given on a four-point scale, ranging from never (1) to always (4). Table 2 contains the descriptive statistics (means, standard deviations) for the experimental and the control group on the SMA-S, mastery, and SPF-IL at the time of the pre-test, and the first and the second post-test.
Statistical analysis Analysis of variance (ANOVA) with repeated measures was used to test the effectiveness of our bibliotherapy in increasing SMA and mastery. The measures of SMA and mastery were considered to be repeated measures of the within-subjects factor time of measurement (pre-test versus first post-test versus second post-test). Condition was considered as a between-subjects factor (coded +1 for the experimental condition and À1 for the control condition). The F-ratio was used to test the significance of mean differences between conditions. We used Cohen's d to describe the magnitude of group differences. This measure of effect size was calculated by subtracting the mean difference score (post-treatment À pre-treatment) of the control group from that of the experimental group, and dividing their difference by the pooled standard deviation. A hierarchical regression analysis was performed to test the effect of our bibliotherapy on subjective well-being, and to verify whether this effect was mediated by SMA. This analysis was preferred above an analysis of variance, as performed on SMA and mastery, because an ANOVA does not combine all the relevant testing into a single analysis [30]. In the first step of the regression analysis, pre-test scores on the SPF-IL were entered into the regression equation; in the second step, condition was entered; and in the third step, SMA at the time of the first post-test was entered. Because we had a clear expectation about the way in which the results of the experimental and the control group would differ, all effects were tested one-tailed.
