Methods
Subjects and Recruitment The sampling frame was approximately 430000 members enrolled in the Kaiser Permanente Northwest (KPNW) health maintenance organization, in northwest Oregon and southwest Washington. The study research center is located within the HMO, and is scientifically autonomous, self-governed, and committed to conducting public-domain research. The Human Subjects Committee for the HMO approved all study procedures. The study recruitment pool was generated in several cohorts over a 7-month period in 1999. We employed the HMO's electronic medical record (EMR) systems to identify 2 groups of potential participants (see Figure 1). The first group was adults (n = 6994 over 7 cohorts) who received traditional HMO medical services (medication, psychotherapy) in the previous 30 days in association with a recorded diagnosis of depression in the EMR. We called this first group depressed cases, although we do not have any independent research confirmation of their clinical mood diagnosis such as with a structured diagnostic interview. The second group was nondepressed adults (n = 6996 over 7 cohorts) who did not receive any depression-related HMO services and did not have an EMR diagnosis of depression, but who were age-and gender-matched to the first group. We are inviting you to participate in a new Internet-based program for people who may be feeling sad or depressed. We are evaluating whether this new service is helpful. We are mailing this brochure to thousands of HMO members. We do not know which members will benefit from this new Internet service, so we are mailing this letter to many people, only some of whom may be feeling depressed. The brochure explained more details of the study, and provided the research Internet address. No further contacts were made; it was left to the initiative of invited individuals to take the first step and visit the study Internet site. At the study home page (the starting point for the study and the intervention), invited members were asked to enter their HMO health plan number, birth day, and birth month. If these did not match the stored data for invited members, the individual was not permitted to proceed. Of a total of 13990 brochures mailed, a total of 526 participants entered confirmed health plan numbers at the study home page. This represented an initial engagement rate of 3.8% of all invited members. However, because not all invited members had Internet access, it is useful to estimate the engagement rate among those with the ability to participate. An internal survey conducted by the HMO health plan at the end of 1999 found that approximately 62.6% (n = 745/1190) of HMO members in this region had Internet access either at home or work or both. Therefore, these 526 participants may also be viewed as an initial engagement rate of 6.0% out of 8758 invited HMO members (62.6% of 13990) estimated to have Internet access. The 526 participants entering the study site were asked to read the on-line consent form, and to indicate their consent by selecting an I agree to take part button. Participants were next asked to complete the on-line assessment battery (described below). Following this, 299 members (56.8%) agreed to be randomized to conditions. Randomization was accomplished immediately by a random-assignment algorithm encoded into the Web site programming: 144 participants were granted access to the experimental Internet site (the intervention condition), and 155 were not granted access (the usual care control condition). Seventy-six members of the nondepressed recruitment group (n = 6996) were enrolled in the study (1.1% of those invited) and 223 of the depressed recruitment group (n = 6994) were enrolled in the study (3.2% of those invited). Compared to HMO members who were mailed a brochure but who were not randomized, those in the randomized sample were more likely to be female (76% of the randomized sample vs 70% of the nonrandomized sample, P= .03) but did not differ in age. Following the on-line consent and data collection (see below), subjects randomized to the Internet depression program were immediately linked to the home page for the intervention program. Subjects randomized to the control condition were immediately linked to the Kaiser Permanente Online home page, a Web site maintained by the health plan for HMO members only [23]. At the Kaiser Permanente Online site, participants could obtain noninteractive information about health concerns, including depression. They could also send a question to an HMO advice nurse or pharmacist, or request an appointment at local medical centers. In both conditions, subjects were free to continue or initiate any other traditional health care services for depression or other psychiatric problems, and/or access Kaiser Permanente Online or any other Internet health resource.
Assessment Battery While enrolling in the study, participants were asked to provide information on their age, gender, marital status, ethnicity, and educational attainment. Table 1 presents these characteristics by experimental condition. Participants completed an on-line version of the Center for Epidemiological Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) [24] a self-report measure of the frequency of 20 depressive symptoms over the past week using a 5-point Likert scale. Reviews of computerized depression assessment methods support their reliability, validity, and equivalence to paper versions, with patients generally more truthful in their answers and often preferring computerized methods for assessing sensitive areas such as suicide and depression [25]. For example, computerized and paper-and-pencil versions of the CES-D correlate at a very high level [26]. Subjects in both conditions were sent e-mail reminders to return to the study Web site at 4-, 8-, 16-, and 32-weeks post-randomization, to complete on-line CES-D follow-up questionnaires. If subjects failed to respond to two e-mail reminders for any single follow-up point, study staff attempted to reach them by telephone. Participants were sent a $5 e-mail gift certificate redeemable with an Internet merchant (Amazon.com) for each completed assessment, for a possible total of $25. Follow-up completion rates were 53% (n = 158) at 4-weeks post-randomization, 65% (n = 195) at 8-weeks, 66% (n = 196) at 16-weeks, and 59% (n = 177) at 32-weeks post-randomization. Overall, 220 participants (74%) completed at least one follow-up assessment. Compared to participants who completed at least one follow-up assessment (baseline CES-D mean = 30.0; SD = 12.2), subjects who completed only the baseline assessment had slightly higher baseline CES-D scores (mean = 33.3, SD = 11.2; unpaired t297 = 2.10, 2-tailed P< .05) but did not differ with respect to experimental condition, age, gender, or recruitment group.
Intervention The Internet intervention was a self-paced, skills training program focusing on the acquisition and use of cognitive restructuring techniques [12,27]. A non-research version of this program, identical to the research program but without the consent and assessment, was made available for public viewing after the trial [11]. Figure 2 shows a screenshot of the program; further screenshots are available in the multimedia appendix at the end of this paper. Much of the Internet site content was adapted from group CBT psychotherapy manuals [28,29] that have been successfully employed in several face-to-face randomized trials [30][31][32][33][34] A representative section of the program is the Thought Helper, made available to participants after they had been taught the basics of identifying negative thoughts and generating positive counter-thoughts. Participants typed their negative or irrational thought into a text box, then clicked on a search button. The Web-server computer searched a predefined list of 200 negative thoughts for ones that best matched the negative thought submitted by the participant, and returned a screen with the most likely matches. Participants selected the returned negative thought that they felt was closest to their original. The program then returned a list of 2 to 5 possible positive counter-thoughts relevant to that belief. The participant was then encouraged to create a personalized positive counter-thought, using relevant portions of the provided examples as they saw fit, and enter it into the Web site for storage. Other interactive aspects of the Web site included an automatically-scored CES-D questionnaire embedded into the first and last sessions (as well as the follow-up assessments); feedback on improvement across time; and cartoons that taught the basics of cognitive restructuring, with participants clicking on cartoon character dialog balloons to identify, for example, irrational beliefs and positive counter-thoughts. We elected not to incorporate live video or audio in this initial version of the program because we wanted to make this program available to all participants including those with slow connections to the Internet. However, we are preparing newer versions of this program (to be tested in subsequent randomized trials) which have live video vignettes and exercises, to take advantage of the increasing availability of high-speed, high-bandwidth Internet connections, such as cable modems. Participants randomized to the intervention arm of the study were able to sign-in and use the Web site whenever they wanted, for the entire duration of the study. The modal number of sessions was 1 (41.0% of users), the median was 2 sessions, the mean was 2.6 (SD = 3.5), and the range was 1 to 20 sessions. Overall, this suggested a low level of use of the depression skills training site.
Health Care Utilization Computerized data systems provided encounter data for HMO inpatient and outpatient services, prescriptions, lab tests, emergency room visits, etc. For this trial, participant use of non-HMO health care services was not assessed.
Analytical Plan All analyses were intent-to-treat. We examined continuous CES-D scores using random effect regression analyses, modeling an unstructured covariance matrix, with slope and intercept as random effects [35,36]. We estimated both linear and quadratic effects for our data, as these models best fit the data. The linear trend indicates the direction and rate of change, while the quadratic trend indicates whether the rate of change increased or decreased at some point during the observation period. However, only the significance for linear trends is reported, as this effect is relevant for hypothesis testing.
Sample Size Determining the needed sample for this trial was difficult, given the lack of prior Internet randomized trials in mental health. However, extrapolating from reviews of the relevant mental health bibliotherapy literature [5], we identified an upper limit effect size (ES) of .55 for the current study. However, all participants in this trial were also free to obtain traditional usual care depression treatments, which might result in fewer differences between study conditions. Therefore, we selected a more conservative ES of .30 to .35 as more appropriate for this trial. For a sample calculation, we assumed a 2-sided alpha = 0.05, power = .80, and a standard deviation of 8.5 for the CES-D (the main dependent variable), derived from the depressed adult sample originally used to validate this scale [37]. This resulted in a needed sample of between 256 and 350 for the specified ES range (.30-.35). We selected the midpoint sample size of 300 as our goal.
