Methods Pilot Study Procedures. We used a highly controlled pilot study in order to determine first the viability of a recently proposed (see Luthans, Avey et al., 2006;Luthans, Youssef, & Avolio, 2007, Chapter 8) training intervention model (described in detail below) for impacting the four constructs and the combined core factor of psychological capital. This pilot utilized a sample of 242 advanced management students from a large midwestern university. The focus and examples used in the training intervention were slightly adapted to be relevant to this sample. A little over half (58%) of this sample were male and their average age was 21.1 (SD ϭ 2.66). These participants were told they would be participating in leadership training. Importantly, the participants were randomly assigned to treatment (N ϭ 153) or control (N ϭ 89) groups. The treatment groups received a 2-hour training intervention conducted by training facilitators that utilized a series of exercises and group discussions designed to impact the participants' level of efficacy, hope, optimism, and resilience, individually and overall in terms of their PsyCap. The psychological capital intervention (PCI) model for this training is depicted in Figure 1, and a brief summary of the specific content is found in the Appendix (a narrative of how this model was actually implemented is also in the following sections). Within the 2-hour intervention we counterbalanced the order of exercises in the treatment groups. All materials and exercises (except for the ordering) were the same for all treatment groups. Specifically, one set of participants received the intervention first targeting hope and efficacy, followed by resilience and optimism. The alternative order included first receiving the intervention focused on resilience and optimism followed by hope and efficacy. Analysis of variance revealed no significant mean difference in participants' level of psychological capital between the ordering conditions in both pre-and posttests. Those randomly assigned to the control groups were given a different (i.e., next best) intervention that focused on group decision making (not the four positive constructs), and included similar duration and exercise format to maintain as much equivalence of the treatment and control conditions as possible. Main Study Procedures. After the pilot study was completed and assessed, the main study consisted of a heterogeneous group of managers (N ϭ 80) sampled across a wide variety of organizations in a medium-sized midwestern city. Volunteers were recruited by the university to participate in a public service "leadership training workshop" (i.e., the same 2-hour intervention as depicted in Figure 1 and the Appendix used in the pilot phase, but with slightly different, more relevant examples for this sample of practicing managers). All the participants received the 2-hour training intervention at the same time in the same facility. This sample had an average age of 36 years with, on average, a little over a dozen years of full-time work experience. The population was 54% male and predominantly white (76%; 4% were African American, 9% Asian, 7% Hispanic, and 1% Native American). The Intervention Training Implementation. As indicated above, the content of the psychological capital training intervention utilized in both the pilot and main study is summarized in Figure 1 and the Appendix and is drawn from Luthans and colleagues (Luthans, Avey et al., 2006;Luthans, Youssef, & Avolio, 2007, Chapter 8). The goals in implementing this psychological capital intervention (PCI) were (a) short duration to minimize disruption in the work process, (b) designed to influence each of the four positive psychological dimensions, and (c) designed to influence the overall positive psychological core construct through an integration of the underlying principles and developmental dimensions of each of the four individual PsyCap resources. Our purpose of the focused short duration followed the models of Locke, Shaw, Saari, and Latham (1981) and Luthans and Kreitner (1985), who have demonstrated successful similar short-term goal setting and reinforcement interventions to improve performance (Stajkovic & Luthans, 1997, 2001). The intervention training implementation included two stages. First, we used a series of exercises specific to each of the four constructs to impact development (see Appendix). Next, we utilized similar, but more integrative, writing, discussion, and reflective exercises. The purpose of this second phase of the training was to integrate the development of the individual facets into an understanding and operationalization of the overall positive psychological construct. Examples of the exercises used in both developing the individual dimensions and then integrating them into the overall PsyCap included one that focused on broadening the hope-oriented agentic capacity and pathways thinking toward a specific goal. First, each participant was asked to consider and then write down a personal goal or goals. Drawing from Snyder' s (2000) hope theory and specific guidelines from hope development used in clinical applications, the facilitator (one of the researchers) led participants through a series of techniques to set and phrase goals to increase agentic capacity (Bandura, 2008). This included parceling large goals into manageable units (called "stepping" in hope development; see Snyder, 2000), thereby also increasing efficacy over smaller subgoals. Next, participants were guided into considering multiple pathways to accomplishing each goal and to share (i.e., model for others) those routes in small discussion groups within the intervention session. These small-group discussions then led to additional pathways to accomplishing the goal. Thus, the capacity for pathway generation was expected to be increased through vicarious learning and in turn to enhance participants' level of efficacy in utilizing the hope application of deriving multiple pathways to accomplish a given goal. In addition, by increasing their efficacy to accomplish the goal, the participants were expected to increase their positive expectations of goal accomplishment and thus their levels of optimism. Next, through the development of several pathways to accomplish the goal, levels of resilience were expected to increase given that multiple pathways allow individuals to bounce back to being successful by selecting an alternate pathway when the original pathway becomes blocked. In other words, part of resilience is bouncing back after a setback. These setbacks can be when a goal is not reached and the pathway to that goal becomes blocked. By increasing the ability and efficacy to develop multiple pathways, individuals may choose an alternate pathway when the current one is blocked, getting them proactively re-energized to succeed. Given the assumption in optimism development that people tend to make unrealistically negative distortions, which in turn generate negative affective thought processes and behavior, the perspective behind the intervention training included making participants more aware of their thoughts and identifying them as negative. Once identified, these negative thoughts can be isolated and challenged by the participant and by others in the discussion groups. The goal of this technique was to make beliefs or expectations about the future more realistically optimistic. As shown in Figure 1, PCI, and content summarized in the Appendix, such developmental inputs are drawn from each of the four constructs and then integrated as described above during this 2-hour training intervention. In conclusion, the PCI implementation was designed to increase levels of each of the four resources and, importantly, the overall PsyCap of the training participants. The PCI guidelines draw from extant research on each capacity grounded in clinical psychology (hope, resilience), attribution and expectancy theories (optimism) and Bandura' s (1997) work in efficacy and its corresponding sources of development (Bandura, 1997(Bandura,, 2000)). In the training intervention for both the pilot and main study we applied these training principles and guidelines of development from each respective dimension/ construct and overall PsyCap. The training intervention leveraged techniques from both theoretical bases (e.g., Bandura, 1997;Carver & Scheier, 2002;Masten & Reed, 2002;Snyder, 2000) and more practical implementation guidelines (e.g., Bandura, 2000;Coutu, 2002;Seligman, 1998;Snyder, 1994;Stajkovic & Luthans, 1998b).
Unit of Analysis, Measures, and Analysis Techniques. A recent review by Yammarino, Dionne, Chun, and Dansereau (2005) found that less than 30% of leadership studies explicitly stated levels of analysis and measurement, which is considered the starting point for any theory and research effort (Klein, Dansereau, & Hall, 1994). Thus, we want to point out that the present study measured and analyzed the positive constructs and PsyCap at the individual level of analysis. However, the individual-level focus used here does not preclude for the future focusing on dyadic, group, or organizational levels of analysis for measuring and enhancing positive psychological capital (e.g., Youssef & Luthans, 2005). In addition, the performance outcomes were also measured and analyzed at the individual level of analysis. Measurement of PsyCap. In both phases of this research, PsyCap was measured with the use of the 24-item psychological capital questionnaire (PCQ) found in its entirety in Luthans, Youssef, and Avolio (2007) and empirically validated by Luthans, Avolio et al. (2007). Permission to use the PCQ is available to researchers free of charge at www.mindgarden.com. This instrument was administered twice within 3 days before and 3 days after the training intervention in both the pilot and main study. The 24 items that make up the survey were adapted from previously published scales that have been analyzed and supported in the positive psychology literature across multiple studies and have been used in previous workplace studies by themselves and in combination (e.g., see Avey, Luthans & Youssef, in press;Luthans, Avolio et al., 2007;Luthans et al., 2005;Luthans, Norman et al., 2008;Youssef & Luthans, 2007). Specifically, the instrument consists of six items adapted from each of the following scales: (a) hope (Snyder et al., 1996); (b) resilience (Wagnild & Young, 1993); (c) optimism (Scheier & Carver, 1985); and (d) efficacy (Parker, 1998). Sample items from each of the subscales included: "I feel confident helping to set targets/goals in my area of work" (efficacy); "If I should find myself in a jam at work, I could think of many ways to get out of it" (hope); "I always look on the bright side of things regarding my job" (optimism); and "I usually manage difficulties one way or another at work" (resilience). Responses were given on a 6-point Likert-type scale: 1 ϭ strongly disagree, 2 ϭ disagree, 3 ϭ somewhat disagree, 4 ϭ somewhat agree, 5 ϭ agree, and 6 ϭ strongly agree. All the subscales in this study demonstrated reliability alphas greater than 0.70 with the exception of resilience in the student sample of the pilot (a ϭ 0.69). However, resilience did demonstrate alpha above 0.70 in the practicing managers' sample. In addition, the overall 24-item composite PCQ demonstrated reliability alphas greater than 0.90 in both samples. Because this is a relatively new scale, we conducted a confirmatory factor analysis (CFA) with the two samples to determine whether we could replicate validation results reported previously by Luthans, Avolio et al. (2007). This CFA used the maximum-likelihood procedure on the pilot sample and the heterogeneous sample of managers. The higher-order model we tested had six items loading on each latent factor (i.e., hope, resilience, optimism, and efficacy), as well as the four latent factors loading on an overall higher order, core factor. All of the item loadings were significant (p Ͻ 0.01) on their respective latent factor. Results for the pilot sample were standardized root-mean-square residual (SRMR) ϭ 0.051, RMSEA ϭ 0.051, comparative fit index (CFI) ϭ 0.937. With the use of the Hu and Bentler (1999) combinatorial rule that two of three indices should fit the recommendation of SRMR Յ 0.08, RMSEA Յ 0.06, and CFI Յ 0.95, results from this sample suggest moderate fit for the higher-order factor model. Results for the practicing managers' sample were SRMR ϭ 0.046, RMSEA ϭ 0.044, CFI ϭ 0.950, providing evidence for a strong model fit based on all three indices. Thus, supporting previous research (Luthans, Avolio et al., 2007), findings from both the pilot and main study samples in this study provide support that the four positive constructs represent an underlying latent core positive psychological factor (PsyCap). We next compared the proposed higher-order model of each capacity loading to the higher-order factor with four competing models, including three models that combined various dimensions as well as a single-factor model in which all items loaded to one factor. Results shown in Table 1 indicate the higher-order factor model fit the observed data better than the competing models across both samples. Results from this model comparison provide support for the higher order and replicate results of the previous study (Luthans, Avolio et al., 2007). Performance Measures. Performance measures were not collected for the pilot sample, as the previously noted purpose was to determine under highly controlled conditions the viability of the PCI model for developing PsyCap utilizing random assignment to treatment and control groups. The sample for the main study consisting of the cross-section of managers in a wide variety of organizations used a multisource rating of performance. Specifically, in this sample we administered a self-rated four-item performance measure with a 1-10 rating scale (e.g., "How would you rate your performance/effectiveness as compared with your peers?") to participants within 1 week before and a week after the intervention. Importantly, however, in addition the participants' managers also rated their performance a week before and a week after the training intervention with the use of the same performance scale reworded for managers rating the target participant. Separate analyses were run for both self-and their managerrated performance. Participants' managers were told the purpose for their confidential ratings of the trainees' on-the-job performance was part of a university-related research project. However, in order to help minimize rater bias effects, the participants' managers were not directly told that these individuals were involved in a developmental training intervention. Analysis Techniques. We conducted paired-sample t-tests for both the pilot and manager samples. This analysis was deemed appropriate given the focus on mean differences at two points in time (pre-and postintervention). In addition, we also calculated confidence intervals, effect sizes, and binomial effect-size displays.
