METHODS
Patients Recruitment of female fibromyalgia patients was conducted through notices in local newspapers and an academic hospital and by contacting patients in our laboratory database who had requested to be informed of research participation opportunities. The trial was advertised as a stress management writing program. Exclusion criteria were age younger than 21 years, no formal diagnosis of fibromyalgia by a physician, major psychiatric disorder, current substance abuse, previous experience with systematic journaling, lack of transportation to the research laboratory for baseline health assessments and writing sessions, or inability to read English and to write for at least 20 minutes. Patients' physicians provided confirmation of fibromyalgia diagnosis after written consent of each participant. Of 297 women who inquired, 54 (18%) were ineligible, and 129 (43%) were eligible but not interested or unavailable for scheduled laboratory visits. Thus, 114 (47%) of 243 eligible patients participated (Figure 1).
WRITTEN EXPRESSION IN FIBROMYALGIA
Measures
Psychological Well-Being The Quality of Life Scale (QOL) is a 16-item instrument designed to measure quality of life across a broad array of life domains in patients with chronic illness. The instrument has been shown to be reliable and contentvalid. Among medical patients, internal consistency was above 0.85, and 6-week test-retest reliability was 0.76 (42). The state version of the State-Trait Anxiety Scale (STAI-S) is a 20-item, self-report instrument that assesses anxiety at the moment. Internal reliability is greater than 0.90 in several adult samples, it correlates well with other measures of anxiety, and it is responsive to changes in anxiety state (43). The Beck Depression Inventory-II (BDI) is a 21-item self-report measure incorporating cognitive, affective, and somatic aspects of depressed mood (44). Internal consistency is 0.86 for psychiatric samples and 0.81 for nonpsychiatric samples, and the BDI has demonstrated validity in distinguishing levels of depressed mood and being sensitive to treatment change (45).
Pain The Multidimensional Pain Inventory (MPI) is a 61-item self-report inventory for use in chronic pain populations that generates 13 empiricallyderived scale scores, including pain severity, perception of how pain interferes with daily life activities, appraisals of the support received from significant others, and perception of how significant others respond to their displays of pain. Internal consistency of scale items ranges from 0.70 to 0.90, and test-retest stability of the scales ranges from 0.62 to 0.91 (46). A taxonomy of three adaptational styles of coping with pain has been derived and replicated across a variety of chronic pain groups (47)(48)(49)(50)(51). The McGill Pain Questionnaire is a widely-used self-report pain questionnaire assessing several domains of pain experience: intensity, sensory, and affective. Test-retest reliability within 7 days is 0.70 (52). The McGill Pain Questionnaire has been shown to differentiate among distinct pain syndromes (53,54), and a review of factor analytic investigations has found support for the affective and sensory dimensions (55). Reliability and validity have been documented across several studies.
Fatigue The energy/fatigue 4-item subscale of the Medical Outcome Survey (MOS) Short-Form General Health Survey was used. Internal consistency for the scale is 0.78, and it has been shown to differentiate fatigue levels between patient and nonpatient groups (56). Three additional items assessing tiredness on awakening, tiredness during the day, and quality of sleep were rated over the past week on 4-point scales.
Other Health Variables The Fibromyalgia Impact Questionnaire (FIQ) is an adaptation of the Health Assessment Questionnaire and the Arthritis Impact Measurement Scales. Items assessing physical functioning and stiffness were used in this study. One-week test-retest reliability for physical functioning is 0.95, and validity is comparable with the scales on which it is based and is satisfactory (57). Four additional subscales from the MOS Short-Form General Health Survey were selected: overall health, social functioning, health distress, and cognitive dysfunction. Three items from the Clinical Health Assessment Questionnaire (CLINHAQ) were used to assess gastrointestinal, headache, and fatigue symptoms on a 100-point visual analogue scale (VAS).
Design Study participants were randomized into one of three conditions: emotional disclosure writing condition (ED), neutral writing condition (NW), and usual-care condition (UC). Randomization was achieved through a computergenerated random distribution of sequential numbers into three groups. This group assignment list was kept by the first author, who was not involved in patient recruitment or eligibility determination. When a patient was determined to be eligible, the first author consulted the assignment list and informed the research staff of the patient's group assignment. The NW condition controlled for any placebo effects associated with coming to the laboratory and engaging in a credible treatment activity. The UC condition controlled for the natural course of the illness and provided a basis on which to determine whether the NW condition exhibited any effect beyond UC. MPI patient classification was used to stratify patient assignment to the experimental groups such that equal numbers of patients in the three pain classifications were randomly assigned to each experimental condition to allow investigation of relative attrition and treatment response (not reported in this article). Assessments were conducted before randomization, posttreatment, at 4-month follow-up, and at 10-month follow-up. Data collection began in October 2001, and follow-up was completed in September 2003.
Procedure Interested patients were provided with detailed information about the trial and screened for eligibility during an initial telephone interview. Participants were scheduled for pretreatment assessment in the laboratory, at which time informed consent and permission to contact their physician to confirm their diagnosis of fibromyalgia were obtained and assessment instruments were completed. On completion of their pretreatment visit, patients were informed that they would be contacted within the next couple of days regarding their group assignments and dates for their next laboratory visits. The MPI was scored, classification was determined, assignment to condition was made, and patients were telephoned and informed of assignment to a writing condition or usual care. Patients who could not be classified into one of the three MPI adaptational groups (N ϭ 22), ie, scoring indicated hybrid or anomalous patterns, were not randomized into the study design. Patients assigned to the ED or NW conditions were scheduled for three visits to the laboratory in approximately 1-week intervals. On arrival at the laboratory, patients were escorted into a private office, a research staff member read aloud the writing assignment for that session, and patients were left alone with a written copy of the instructions for 20 minutes to complete their writing. The research staff alerted the patient 20 minutes later that the session was complete and collected the writing. Posttreatment and follow-up assessments were conducted by mail. Patients were paid $40 for participation. The research protocol was approved by the Stony Brook University Research Compliance office.
Written Emotional Disclosure Condition The written emotional disclosure condition (ED) instructions, a variation on those used in previous studies (25,58), focused on factual retelling of an important current or past traumatic event along with emotional expression and cognitive reappraisal. The instructions indicated that grammar and spelling were unimportant and that the writing should involve deep thoughts and feelings about the event. The instructions for session