Method
Sample and procedure Our sampling frame consisted in a complete list of 62 primary schools in the province of Cuenca, a middle class rural area in Spain. The province of Cuenca was chosen for several reasons: (a) schools in this province are involved in a large educational technology integration project which, through the Regional Government, provides a free laptop to students in years 5 and 6. Students can take the laptop home, and they have Internet access at school; (b) according to INE (the Spanish National Institute of Statistics), Internet access in Castilla-La Mancha (the region where Cuenca is located) has increased by 30 % in recent years, and around 81 % of homes currently have Internet access (INE 2010). Indeed, Cuenca is the province with the largest number of homes with Internet access in Castilla-La Mancha when, comparatively, it has always been last in the region; and (c) no studies about cyberbullying have been systematically conducted in this province, although a preliminary analysis carried out in a study about school bullying showed that cyberbullying should be analyzed in more detail. Sample size was calculated following the formula by Daniel (1999) by considering a Z value of 1.96 (95 % confidence interval) and a 3 % error margin. Since we were unable to obtain the prevalence estimation of cyberbullying from previous studies as no studies have been conducted in the province, we considered an expected proportion (P) of 0.5 by following the criteria described by McNeil (1996). For the analysis, we also took into account that according to the Regional Castilla-La Mancha Government's statistical data (JCCM 2010), the student population in the 2009/2010 academic year was 1954 for year 5 and 2025 for year 6 (a total number of 3979 students). The analysis determined that 847 participants were required for the study. To achieve the a priori-determined sample size of 847 students, we contacted the director of each school using our ram-list of primary schools. We intentionally oversampled by randomly selecting 1225 potential participants who (1) had received their parents' permission to participate (143 students did not obtain parental consent to participate) and (2) were attending school at the time the research was done. A total of 1082 students completed the instruments (88 % response rate). Before the analysis, all the data were checked for missing values. Participants were required to provide valid data for all the study variables. Fourteen cases were excluded as some data were missing in some measures. Thus, the final number of participants with full records for the variables included for the analysis was 1068 schoolchildren (548 males and 520 females) from 11 public schools located in different villages in the province of Cuenca. Participants' ages ranged from 10 to 12 years (mean age 11.4 years; SD 0.70). Of these, 496 children (46.4 %) were in year 5 (aged 10-11), and 572 were in year 6 (aged 11-12). Data were collected by self-reported questionnaires through group administration in classrooms handed out 6 months after the 2010/2011 academic year began. Participants were voluntarily asked to participate in a study on Internet use. The students who returned signed forms with their own and their parent's written consents participated. Questionnaires were anonymous, thus preserving confidentiality. Two researchers administered questionnaires to the participants, clarified certain items and answered questions. The procedure took approximately 35 min.
Instruments
Cyberbullying victimization experiences Students were provided with the Tokunaga (2010) definition of cyberbullying victimization. After reading the definition, they indicated how often they had become victims of different behaviors over the Internet in the last 6 months using a ten-item self-report measure. Items were scored on a 5-point scale (1 0 Never, 2 0 Once a month, 3 0 Once a week, 4 0 Once a day, 5 0 Several times a day). The cyberbullying victimization items were devised by using the Spanish measure "Escalas de victimización a través de Internet -Internet Victimization Scales" (Buelga et al. 2010). Example items were "They have told lies or rumors about me", "Photos or videos of me or my family have been posted or manipulated without my consent", and "They have said, send or done dirty things to annoy me". The internal consistency coefficient (Cronbach's alpha) was .80 for the entire present sample. A principal components analysis (PCA) with Oblimin rotation was conducted on all ten items. The Kaiser-Meyer-Oklin value index was .83, and the Bartlett's Test of Sphericity reached statistical significance (p<.001), indicating that the correlation matrix was suitable for the factor analysis. The PCA yielded a two-factor structure. Items with factor loadings of .40 or above were selected. The obtained two-factor solution explained 47.7 % of variance. The first factor explained 37.2 % of variance and grouped five items referring to denigration and outing (Cronbach's α0.76). The second factor also comprised five items, explained 10.5 % of variance and was related to cyberstalking and online harassment (Cronbach's α0.71). The items in each factor were labeled following the cyberbullying categories described by Willard (2006). It is necessary to note that the factor structure found in this study differed from the one-factor structure suggested by the author who developed the instrument. Despite our two-factor structure, no composite variables were created by taking the average of each factor's items. Consequently, rather than analyzing different cyberbullying methods, the subsequent analyses were performed by categorizing participants as victims or non-victims following the criteria explained in "Results section".
Internet use Internet access Participants were asked to indicate whether they had Internet access at home and out-of-home Internet access, and if they used the laptop provided for their schools for Internet access. Each item was coded as a dummy variable; positive responses were coded as 1 and negative responses as 0. Children also indicated in an open question where they actually connected to the Internet if not at home. Additionally, participants were asked about where the computer was located when accessing the Internet at home: a) a common area, living room or work room; b) a private area, a bedroom. Internet activities Based on the literature, participants were asked to indicate how often they engaged in the following Internet activities: 1) visiting social networking sites, 2) e-mailing, 2) instant messaging, 3) sharing videos, 4) chatting in a chat room, 5) searching for information, 6) downloading files, and 7) gaming. Answers were given on a 5-point scale ranging from 0 0 Never to 5 0 Every day. Valkenburg and Peter (2007a), we used three items to measure online communication intensity: 1) On the last day you were online, how long did you use chat or instant messaging? 2) On the last average week day you were online, how long did you use chat or instant messaging? and 3) In the last average weekend, how long did you use chat or instant messaging? The response categories for the three items were 1 (none), 2 (less than 30 min), 3 (between 30 min and 1 h), 4 (between 1 and 2 h), 5 (between 2 and 3 h) and 6 (more than 3 h). The answers to the three items were standardized. The factor analysis showed that items loaded on one factor and explained 77.33 % of variance. Finally, Cronbach's alpha was .84.
Online communication intensity Like
Online communication purposes The online communication purpose questions were devised by using the items developed by Peter et al. (2006). Participants were asked how often they communicated online 1) to speak with my real-life friends (maintaining relationships), 2) because I dare to say more (social compensation), 3) to belong to a group or to be a member of something (social inclusion), and 4) to make new friends (meeting people). Items ranged from 1 0 Never to 4 0 Almost always. To ensure that items concepts were comparable for the English version and the Spanish translated version, back-translation methods were used. The initial measure was translated from English into Spanish by a bilingual psychology researcher, and discrepancies in content, language and meaning were discussed with the authors. Finally, the measure was back-translated and compared to the original English version to ensure the concepts were the same. The same procedure was followed with all the English measures used in this study.
Parental mediation Participants were asked how often their parents employed each strategy presented in Table 1. The six items for the parental mediation techniques employed by Mesch (2009) were used to measure restrictive and evaluative mediation. Three items were added for the co-using mediation strategies: item 1, by Livingstone and Helsper (2008); and items 2 and 3, by Lee and Chae (2007). The response categories ranged from 1 0 Never to 4 0 Always. This instrument was built on previous measures about parental mediation, and there is no previous factor analysis. For this reason, an exploratory factor analysis with Oblimin rotation was conducted on all nine items. The Kaiser-Meyer-Okling value was .85, and the Bartlett's Test of Sphericity reached statistical significance (p<.001). These results support the factorability of the items. The PCA yielded a two-factor structure. Items with factor loadings of .40 or above were selected. The obtained two-factor solution explained 51.5 % of variance. The first factor explained 38.9 % of variance and grouped six items (restrictive and evaluative mediation items composed this factor) referring to establishing rules (Cronbach's α0.77). The second factor (composed of three items) explained 12.5 % of variance and grouped the three co-using mediation items (Cronbach's α0.70). Factor structure did not differentiate between evaluative and restrictive mediation, probably because the items refer to rules about Internet use, although some of these rules were imposed by parents and others were discussed between parents and children. However, in order to compare our results with previous research works, instead of creating composite variables with all nine items, it was important to examine restrictive, evaluative and co-using mediation individually. We used the nine items in all the subsequent analyses.
Analysis plan The general descriptives about Internet access location and Internet use were detailed. Frequency of cyberbullying victimization was first analyzed using a restrictive criterion described in "Instruments section". The data on the distribution of participants among cybervictimization experiences were summarized as percentages. Gender, grade and Internet location access differences in the participants' classification as victims or non-victims were analyzed using a Chi square test. Student'st-tests were conducted to examine the differences between victims and non-victims for the independent variables (Internet activities, online communication intensity and purposes, and parental mediation strategies). The odds ratios (OR) with a 95 % confidence interval were computed by a logistic regression analysis to establish which of the above-described factors better associated with cyberbullying victimization. To obtain such information, the forward stepwise method was used in the logistic regression analysis to eliminate the independent variables that did not determine statistically significant cyberbullying victimization. All the analyses were done with the SPSS 19.0 statistical software.
