RESEARCH DESIGN AND METHODS
Design Participants (n = 260) were randomly assigned to either the IG (access to the guided GET.ON M.E.D. intervention) or the active CG (access to unguided online psychoeducation). Outcome variables were assessed at baseline (T1) and at 8 weeks after randomization (posttreatment; T2) (Fig. 1). A detailed description of the study is provided elsewhere (15). The study was approved by the Psychology Ethics Committee of the Philipps-University of Marburg, Germany (German Clinical Trial Register DRKS00004748).
Setting and Subjects Participants were recruited by means of a comprehensive online and offline advertisement strategy. Through collaboration with a large-scale German health insurance company, individuals diagnosed with diabetes were informed of the study. Additionally, advertisements were placed in German journals for individuals with diabetes and on social networks such as Facebook. German-speaking adults with type 1 and type 2 diabetes and comorbid depressive symptoms were recruited between March 2013 and January 2014. Knowing that web-based interventions are effective for individuals with severe and less severe mental health problems (9,13), we decided to include participants with both moderate and high depressive symptoms (Center for Epidemiologic Studies Depression Scale [CES-D] $23; 23 is the cutoff score for clinically relevant symptoms of depression in the German version of the CES-D [16]). To measure actual and past presence and severity of depressive symptoms, we included a telephone-administered Structured Clinical Interview for DSM-IV Axis I Disorders (SCID-I, section A) (17). Exclusion criteria were suicide risk, current psychotherapeutic treatment, or presence on a waiting list for such treatment. All of the participants had full access to treatment as usual in their routine diabetes and mental health care. To control for potential confounding effects, we asked for subject usage of other mental health care services during the trial at posttreatment.
Randomization Eligible participants were invited to complete the baseline measurement, sign their informed consent, and participate in the SCID-I. In addition to the SCID-I, we included a suicide protocol to identify and exclude individuals who reported current suicidal ideations. For randomization, an automated web-based program was used (http://randomisation.eu).
Interventions Intervention Group The GET.ON M.E.D. intervention consisted of six consecutive sessions, with the opportunity of two additional sessions addressing weight management and improving healthy sleeping. They were advised to complete one session per week; each session lasted ;45 min. One month after the end of the intervention, participants were offered an optional booster session. The intervention GET.ON M.E.D. was based on two core evidence-based elements: systematic behavioral activation (18) and problem solving (19). Diabetesspecific themes were an essential part of each session, covering the link between diabetes and depression, worrying about diabetes problems, diabetes and sexuality, physical activity, and communication with general practitioners. Coaches (graduate students or psychologists) gave personalized feedback by e-mail within 48 h of each session. Each coach was supervised by an experienced clinical psychologist. To address poor adherence, known to be a problem in web-based interventions (12,14), we integrated a text message coach and phone calls. The participants had the opportunity to receive daily standardized text messages, with the aim of supporting participants to reach intervention goals and to implement behavioral change strategies. If a participant showed no activity within 7 days, the coach sent an e-mail and offered assistance. If there was no contact within 1 week, the participant received a phone call. Participants were asked about current obstacles and encouraged to proceed with the intervention.
CG The CG received access to an online psychoeducational program, based on the German S3-Guideline/National Disease Management Guideline for Unipolar Depression (20). There is evidence that psychoeducation is helpful in reducing depressive symptoms (21).
Outcome Measures
Primary Outcome The primary outcome was depressive symptom severity as measured by the German version of the CES-D. The CES-D assesses the frequency of depressive symptoms during the preceding week. Items are scored on a 4-point Likert scale ranging from "not at all" (0) to "nearly every day" (4). A total score ranging between 0 and 60 can be calculated (22). A score of 23 or higher is indicative of clinically relevant depressive symptoms in German populations (16). The scale has been shown to display good to very good internal consistency (a = 0.87-0.92 in various German samples) (16). Cronbach a in this study was a = 0.91.
Secondary Outcomes Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale. We used the depression subscale from the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS) as an additional measure on depressive affect, suited for use in somatic patients. The higher the score, the more the participant suffers from depressive symptoms. Values less than 7 indicate the absence of depressive symptoms (23). The internal consistency of the HADS subscale for Depression (HADS-D) varied from a = 0.67 to 0.90 (24). In this study, Cronbach a was a = 0.86. Problem Areas in Diabetes. The Problem Areas in Diabetes (PAID) scale five-item short form was used to assess participants' current emotional distress related to living with diabetes (25). A total score higher than 7 denotes elevated diabetes-related emotional distress (26). Reliability and validity of the scale have shown to be good (a = 0.83). In this study, Cronbach a was a = 0.88. Questionnaire. As an indicator of coping with diabetes, we used the German version of the Acceptance and Action Diabetes Questionnaire (AADQ). The total values vary between 11 and 77. A higher value represents better diabetes acceptance. The scale displays good internal consistency (a = 0.86) (27). In this study, Cronbach a was a = 0.77. Diabetes Self-Management Questionnaire. Diabetes self-management was assessed using the Diabetes Self-Management Questionnaire (DSMQ). The DSMQ is a 16-item self-report questionnaire that measures self-care activities associated with glycemic control. A total score of 6 or higher indicates possible diabetes selfmanagement problems. Cronbach a is good (a = 0.84) (28). In this study, Cronbach a was a = 0.77. User Satisfaction. We assessed participant satisfaction using an adapted, eight-item version of the German Client Satisfaction Questionnaire (CSQ-8) (29,30).
Statistical Analysis Based on previous studies (8,12), this trial was powered to detect a mean difference of d = 0.35 in the primary outcome between the groups at postmeasurement, with an a of 0.05 and a power of 80% in a two-tailed test. Based on the power calculation, we needed to include 260 participants. The analyses were performed according to the recommendations of the Consolidated Standards of Reporting Trials (CONSORT) statement (31). Efficacy of GET.ON M.E. D. was analyzed on an ITT basis. To examine the efficacy of the intervention for those who adhered to the full treatment (session one to six), additional PP analyses were conducted.
Missing Data All of the participants completed the baseline assessment. Missing data at posttreatment were imputed using a Markov chain Monte Carlo multivariate imputation algorithm (missing data module in SPSS 20) with 10 estimations per missing value. According to the recommendations of Schafer and Graham (32), this technique can generate precise estimates and is more likely to result in a precise estimation of the true intervention effect compared with other approaches such as the more conservative last observation carried forward method.
Differences in Depressive Symptom Severity and Secondary Outcomes To evaluate the difference between the two groups at posttreatment, we performed ANCOVA with the baseline CES-D score as covariate. Cohen d was calculated as a measure of effect size; as a rule of thumb, d = 0.8 or more was classified as a large effect, d = 0.5-0.8 was classified as a moderate effect, and d = 0.2-0.5 was classified as a small effect (33).
Treatment Response To assess the improvements in depressive symptoms (primary outcome) on an individual level, we calculated the reliable change index of Jacobson and Truax (34). Means and SDs were derived from normative data (16). According to the CES-D German manual, participants with a reliable positive change (reliable change index .1.96; greater than 28.99 points on the CES-D) were classified as "responders," and those who displayed a reliable negative change (greater than +8.99 points on the CES-D) were classified as "deteriorated."
Clinical Significant Change We determined the number of participants who had scores ,23 on the CES-D (16) in both groups and who were also categorized as responders. We assumed that participants who fulfilled both of these criteria achieved a promising improvement. Finally, we assessed the numbers needed to be treated (NNT) (35).
