Methods
Study design and participants In this randomised controlled trial, participants were recruited from 23 HIV treatment centres in the Netherlands. Patients at these centres underwent a twostep screening for depressive symptoms. Nursing consultants and doctors in HIV treatment centres initially screened patients with HIV for depressive symptoms during regular check-ups using the Patient Health Questionnaire-2 (PHQ-2). 17 Patients with PHQ-2 scores higher than zero who were interested in participating in the study were referred to the researchers for a second screening with the Patient Health Questionnaire-9 (PHQ-9), using established cutoff scores. 18 One HIV treatment centre screened patients with the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale, 19 because this questionnaire was already in use. Patients with total scores higher than 2 and less than 16 on the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale were deemed eligible for referral to the researchers. The study was also advertised by the Dutch HIV Association. Researchers contacted all interested patients to provide more infor mation and to screen for eligibility. Eligible individuals were aged 18 years and older, had been diagnosed with HIV at least 6 months before the study, and had mild to moderate depressive symptoms (PHQ-9 score of >4 and <20). Eligible patients were also required to speak Dutch or English, have internet access and an email address, and to be available for 8 weeks to work on the intervention. We excluded individuals with severe cognitive impairments, severe depressive symptoms (PHQ-9 score ≥20), or severe suicidal ideation (score >1 on the suicide item of the PHQ-9), and those who were receiving treatment from a psychologist or
Research in context Evidence before this study In a previous study, we did a meta-analysis of 62 randomised controlled trials published up to Sept 29, 2014, to investigate the effectiveness of psychosocial interventions for people with HIV in improving mental health. The meta-analysis included one internet-based intervention for people with HIV that investigated effects on mood. On Aug 30, 2017, our search was updated; we searched PubMed, PsycINFO, and Embase using terms related to "HIV", "Internet-based therapy", and "depression". One additional study was found. To date, only two studies have investigated the use of internet-based interventions for people with HIV who have depressive symptoms and both found that the interventions did not improve mood.
Added value of this study Our results show that the guided internet-based intervention, Living positive with HIV, might be effective in improving depressive symptoms in people with HIV compared with an attention-only waiting-list control condition. This improvement was sustained over time, and anxiety was significantly reduced in patients who followed the intervention compared with the control. Online interventions have advantages, such as large potential reach and accessibility. Additionally, this intervention is available in Dutch and English and could be adapted for use in other countries.
Implications of all the available evidence People with HIV who have depressive symptoms should be referred to effective psychological treatments. Ehealth interventions are emerging and have been shown to be as effective as face-to-face interventions. Therefore, treatment providers might refer people with HIV who have depressive symptoms to an online intervention, such as the intervention used in this study. More research on moderators, mediators, and the cost-effectiveness of internet-based interventions is needed. psychiatrist, had been on antidepressants for less than 3 months, or had changed type or dose of antidepressants in the past 3 months. The study was approved by the medical ethics committee of Leiden University Medical Center. The study protocol has been published elsewhere. 14 All participants provided online informed consent.
Randomisation and masking Participants were randomly assigned (1:1) to the internetbased intervention or the attention-only waiting-list control condition. Randomisation was done using random number tables to generate the randomisation sequence with block sizes of 12, stratified by treatment centre and sex, and concealed from the main researcher. The main researcher allocated parti cipants to conditions, but the characters in the randomisation file were white until assignment of a participant was carried out (then the letters on one line in the file were made visible). Participants, researchers, and coaches were not masked to the participant's assigned treatment condition.
Procedures Medical data (eg, viral load) were obtained from the AIDS Therapy Evaluation in the Netherlands (ATHENA) cohort study after obtaining consent from the participant. The ATHENA cohort study is maintained by Stichting HIV Monitoring, which is supported by the Dutch Ministry of Health via the National Institute for Public Health and the Environment. A self-designed questionnaire, included in the pretest, was used to obtain information about patient demographics. All participants completed the pretest and were randomly assigned to one of two conditions. Participants in the intervention group did the first post-test after they had completed the intervention (duration 6-10 weeks), followed by two further post-tests 3 and 6 months after completion of the intervention. Participants in the control group received two post-tests: the first post-test was sent 8 weeks after the pretest and the second post-test was sent 3 months after the first post-test was completed (appendix p 1). Participants who completed all questionnaires received €25. The last post-test was completed on Oct 14, 2016. All assessments were completed online via a secured website, with the exception of screening with the PHQ-9, which was completed via telephone conversations. The internet-based self-help intervention consisted of cognitive behavioural therapy. Psychoeducation was alternated with exercises and assignments. The intervention was based on a self-help booklet for people with HIV with depressive symptoms, 15 which was extended to include an activation component and minimal coaching with motivational interviewing, and the programme was translated into English to reach more people with HIV. The intervention included four main components covered in eight lessons. The first component was activation, in which partici pants were encouraged to do pleasant activities. The second component contained relaxation exercises. The third component included assignments to identify and change negative thoughts. The fourth component included goal setting and increasing confidence to attain goals. Participants received login details for the secured website of the intervention. Participants did the intervention for 1-2 h per week for a period of around 8 weeks, and received telephone coaching. Participants in the control condition were put on a waiting list and received attention only via telephone calls from a coach. After the second post-test, participants in the control condition were invited to start the intervention. Participants in the control group who started the intervention received one post-test, the results of which are not reported in this paper and will not be reported elsewhere. All participants received minimal telephone coaching. Participants in the intervention group were called weekly for approximately 15 min by a personal coach, who asked the participants how they were doing and how they were progressing with the intervention. Furthermore, motivational interviewing was used to prevent attrition. Formal psychotherapy was not included in the coaching, but depressive symptoms and suicidal thoughts were monitored. Coaching was offered until participants completed the intervention (maximum duration 10 weeks). After 10 weeks, participants could complete the intervention independently and ask questions via email. Participants in the control group were called weekly for around 5 min by a personal coach, for a period of 8 weeks. The coach asked participants how they were doing and motivated individuals to stay in the study. Coaches monitored depressive symptoms and suicidal thoughts in both the intervention and control groups and patients with severe depressive symptoms or suicidal ideation were referred to their general practitioner or HIV treatment centre. All coaches were clinical psychology Masters students or graduates with an MSc in Psychology who had attended several clinical courses during their Masters, in which they learned communication skills and therapeutic strategies. Coaches were trained by the main researcher. During training, coaching procedures and motivational interviewing were explained and practiced. Coaches received a coaching manual with additional information about motivational interviewing, the study, the procedures, and content of coaching (eg, what to do when depressive symptoms of a participant increase). At the beginning of the study, weekly supervision sessions were arranged with all coaches and the main researcher to discuss difficulties and questions. After a few months, these supervision sessions were phased out, but coaches and researchers could contact each other directly via telephone or email when needed.
Outcomes The primary outcome was depressive symptoms, assessed with the PHQ-9 18 and the Center for Epidemiologic See Online for appendix For more on Stichting HIV Monitoring see https://www. hiv-monitoring.nl/index.php/ nederlands Studies Depression Scale (CES-D) 20 at pretest (baseline), immediately after the intervention (or 8 weeks after baseline in the control group; post-test 1), and at 3 months after the first post-test. As a secondary outcome, in the intervention group only, we also assessed the PHQ-9 and CES-D scores 6 months after completion of the intervention. Total scores ranged between 0 and 27 for the PHQ-9 and 0 and 60 for the CES-D, with higher scores indicating increasing symptom severity. The secondary outcomes were anxiety symptoms, assessed with the Generalized Anxiety Disorder-7 (GAD-7) scale 21 (total score 0-21) at all assessment timepoints, with higher scores indicating increasing symptom severity, and user satisfaction, measured with a self-designed questionnaire at the first post-test. In the intervention group, participants were asked to grade the intervention (0-10; a higher score indicated higher user satisfaction) and whether they would recommend the intervention (yes, maybe, or no). In both groups, participants were also asked to grade the coach (0-10; a higher score indicated higher satisfaction with the coach). Other secondary outcomes not reported in this paper were physical tension, activation (Behavioral Activation for Depression Scale 22 ), cognitive reappraisal (Emotion Regulation Questionnaire 23 ), cognitive coping (Cognitive Emotion Regulation Questionnaire 24 ), depressive thoughts (Crandell Cognitions Inventory 25 ), behavioral coping (Kraaij & Garnefski, Behavioral Emotion Regulation Questionnaire, unpublished questionnaire), coping selfefficacy (Kraaij & Garnefski, unpublished questionnaire), goal adjustment (Goal Disengagement and Reengagement Scale 26 ), personal growth (Garnefski & Kraaij, unpublished questionnaire), negative life events (Life Events Scale), motivation to start with the intervention, compliance, and dropout and reasons for dropout. These outcomes were used in moderator and mediator analyses. The results of these outcomes will be reported elsewhere. There was no data safety monitoring board. Participants were assessed multiple times during the intervention and the study, and the results regarding their symptoms were monitored by the researcher. Additionally, coaches monitored the participants.
Statistical analysis A power analysis with the program Power Analysis and Sample Size Software (PASS) was performed. On the basis of the randomised controlled trial on the effectiveness of the self-help booklet, 15 and an expected dropout of 15% at the first post-test, a sample size of 150 participants was required to detect an effect size of 0•50 with 0•80 power at the 5% significance level. We aimed to include 200 participants because attrition was expected during follow-up. 14 Statistical analysis was done with SPSS software (version 23.0), and a p value of less than 0•05 was considered to indicate statistical significance. Primary and secondary analyses were done by intention to treat. χ² tests and ANOVA were used to investigate differences between participants who dropped out and those who completed the intervention. We did longitudinal multilevel regression analyses 27 using the maximum likelihood estimation method to investigate differences between the groups in changes in depressive and anxiety symptoms from the pretest to the post-tests. Time and group were included as fixed effects and slopes for time and the intercept as random effects. Pretest, post-test 1, and post-test 2 scores were included in the between-group analyses. Pretest and the three post-test scores for the intervention group were included in the within-group analyses to assess the longterm effects of the intervention. The variance components variance-covariance matrix was used for between-group analyses and the hetero geneous autoregressive matrix was used for within-group analyses. Additionally, all outcomes were analysed in the per-protocol sample, which included all randomly assigned participants who completed at least five lessons of the intervention (indicated by self-report); using this minimum ensured that at least three of the four main intervention components were completed. The effect of HIV treatment centre on the random intercept was investigated in an exploratory analysis, by adding treatment centre as an extra level in the analysis. Cohen's d was calculated to assess effect size. For the between-group effect sizes, the mean difference scores for the control group were subtracted from the mean difference scores for the intervention group and divided by the pooled SD of the raw scores at pretest. 28 For the effect size of time (ie, long-term effect of the intervention), we used the formula unstandardised coefficient (b)/SD, 28 using the SD of the raw scores of the intervention group at pretest. Effect sizes were calculated using the estimated values from the longitudinal multilevel regression analyses. The formula used by de Zeeuw and colleagues 29 was used to calculate the SE of the between-group effect size and 95% CIs. Clinically significant differences, deterioration, and number needed to treat from pretest to the first post-test were assessed for the PHQ-9 and the CES-D. A reliable change index was calculated for each individual to determine improvement and their pretest score was subtracted from their first post-test score and divided by the SE of difference between the two scores. 30 To calculate the SE of difference, test-retest reliability (r xx ) was used, where r xx was equal to 0•84 for both the PHQ-9 18 and the CES-D. Reliable change index scores of less than -1•96 indicated symptom improvement. Recovery was calculated by examining whether a cutoff for depression (score 10 on the PHQ-9 31 and 22 on the CES-D 32 ) was reached at the first post-test. Recovery was only assessed in partici pants who scored above this cutoff at pretest (clinical cases), because participants who scored below this cutoff at pretest had already reached the criterion. 30 For participants who scored above the cutoff at pretest, we assessed both improvement and recovery; in cases of both, the criteria for clinically significant change according to Jacobson and Truax 30 were met. Deterioration was also assessed, whereby a reliable change index score higher than 1•96 indicated deterioration. The number needed to treat was calculated using the percentage of participants who met the criteria for clinically significant change. Clinically significant change, deterioration, and number needed to treat were calculated in the per-protocol analysis sample that also completed the first post-test; the raw data were used. This study is registered with the Netherlands Trial registry, number NTR5407.
Role of the funding source The funder of the study had no role in study design, data collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report. The corresponding author had full access to all the data and all authors had final responsibility for the decision to submit for publication.
