Method Participants Participants included middle (97.6%) and high (2.4%) socioeconomic status college students. In the beginning of the study, 693 (239 males and 454 females) subjects were selected and responded to the surveys. However, prior to conducting analyses, 17 subjects were identifi-ed as outliers. All outliers were deleted, leaving 666 cases for the analyses. Th erefore, participants of the study were 666 undergraduate college students (231 males and 435 females) from 15 diff erent programs in the Faculty of Education at Selcuk University, Turkey. Students' ages ranged from 18 to 22 years (M = 19.29, SD = 1.14). One hundred and eighty-one students were freshmen, 254 were sophomores, 120 were juniors and 111 were seniors. Data were collected using the internet users; therefore, convenience sampling was used in this study.
Procedure Th e study was started in September, 2007. After preparing the surveys, they were administered to groups in classrooms during the Fall of 2007. Th e author of the current study administered the surveys. Before completing the surveys, participants were informed about the study and signed a consent form to participate. Th e survey required approximately 20 minutes to complete. All data were coded and entered SPSS by student research assistants at the Faculty of Education.
Instruments Th e survey consisted of three sections. Th e first section consisted of five demographic questions regarding sex, age, department, class year, and socioeconomic level. Th e second section consisted of questions specifically about cyber bullying. Finally, the third section was the Adjective Check List (ACL) (Gough, & Heilbrun, 1983).
Cyber Bullying Questions After the demographic questions, students were provided with an operational definition of cyber bullying. Belsey's (2008) definition with a set of examples was used to help students understand what is meant by cyber bullying. Following the definition, the following questions were asked to students: Based on the definition of cyber bullying provided above (1) "Have you ever engaged in cyber bullying before today?" (1-Never, 2-One time, 3-Between two-four times, 4-Five or more times). ( 2) "Have you ever been exposed to cyber bullying?" (1-Never, 2-One time, 3-Between two-four times, 4-Five or more times). ( 3) "Would you engage in cyber bullying as a bully in the future?" (1-Yes, 2-I am not sure, 3-No). Two expert reviewers with PhDs examined the items for ambiguity and the overall quality of the instrument. Th e instruments were administered in Turkish.
The Adjective Check List (ACL) Th e ACL was originally developed in 1949 by Gough and was published in 1965 (Gough, & Heilbrun, 1983). Gough and Heilbrun developed the ACL to assist in identifying personal traits of an individual by analyzing their social needs. By analyzing the individual's social needs, the individual's motivations and modus operandi also become apparent (Reljic, 2007). Th e ACL consists of 300 adjectives arranged in alphabetical order. Respondents are asked to endorse adjectives they believe are descriptive of their personality. Th e 300 adjectives are divided into 37 scales: 4 Modus Operandi scales, 15 Need scales, 9 Topical scales, 5 Transactional Analysis scales, and 4 Origence-Intelligence scales (Gough, & Heilbrun, 1983;Reljic, 2007). Th e ACL is a pencil and paper test that was completed in approximately 15-20 minutes. Th e normative sample used to develop the ACL included 5236 male and 4144 female adults, high school students, college students, medical students, graduate students, psychiatric patients, and delinquents from 37 states in the United States (Reljic, 2007). Th e ACL was translated and adapted to Turkish by Savran (Savran, 1993). Savran performed reliability and validity analyses of the ACL on Turkish university students (n=300). Th e internal consistency reliability coeff icients were between .36 and .84 for the 37 subscales (Savran, 1993). Th e Edwards Personal Preference Schedule (EPPS; Edwards, Abbott, & Klockars, 1972;Kuzgun, 1985) was used as a criterion measure to measure the validity of the analyses. Th e mean of correlation coeff icients was .48 (p<.05). Subscales of the ACL were found correlated with each other (between .20 and .80) (Savran, 1993). Savran also conducted norm study of the ACL on Turkish people from diff erent age, education and socioeconomic level (n=700). Results showed that the ACL was a valid and reliable instrument for Turkish population. Th e ACL gives standard scores for Turkish people (Savran, 1993).
The Need Scales of the ACL Fifteen need scales were used in the current study (Gough, & Heilbrun, 1983, 2008). Th ese include: Achievement: Striving to be outstanding in pursuits of socially recognized significance. Dominance: Seeking and sustaining leadership roles in groups or being infl uential and controlling in individual relationships. Endurance: Persisting in any task undertaken. Order: Placing special emphasis on neatness, organization, and planning in one's activities. Intraception: Engaging in attempts to understand one's own behavior or the behavior of others. Nurturance: Engaging in behaviors which extend material or emotional benefits to others. Aff iliation: Seeking and sustaining numerous personal friendships. Heterosexuality: Seeking the company of and deriving emotional satisfaction from interactions with opposite sex-peers. Exhibition: Behaving in such a way as to elicit the immediate attention of others. Autonomy: Acting independently of others or of social values and expectations. Aggression: Engaging in behaviors which attack or hurt others. Change: Seeking novelty of experience and avoiding routine. Succorance: Soliciting sympathy, aff ection, and emotional support from others. Abasement: Expressing feelings of inferiority through self-criticism, guilt, or social impotence. Deference: Seeking and sustaining subordinate roles in relationships with others.
Data Analysis Descriptive and inferential statistics were used to examine the relations and interaction between cyber bullying and the psychological needs subscales of the ACL. Th e statistical package, SPSS 15 for Windows (SPSS for Windows, 2006) was used to analyze the data.
